Building Bye-Laws – 2003
BANGALORE MAHANAGARA PALIKE
BUILDING BYE-LAWS 2003
(Approved by the Government in their Order No.UDD/223/MNU/2001,
Dated 21-02-2004 – Published in pursuance of Section 428 Of the
Karnataka Municipal Corporation Act 1976)
PART I
GENERAL
1.0 SHORT TITLE, EXTENT AND COMMENCEMENT.
1.1 These Bye-Laws shall be called “ The Bangalore Mahanagara Palike Building Bye –
Laws 2003”.
1.2 These Bye-laws shall be applicable within the jurisdiction of the Bangalore Mahanagara
Palike as notified by the Government under Chapter II of the Karnataka Municipal
Corporations Act, 1976.
1.3 These Bye-laws shall come into operation from 5th of June 2004.
1
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
2.0 DEFINITIONS.
In these Bye-laws, unless the context otherwise requires, the expressions given below
shall have the meaning indicated against each of them.
2.1 ‘Act’ means the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976.
2.2 ‘agriculture’ includes horticulture, farming, growing of crops, fruits, vegetables, flowers,
grass, fodder, trees of any kind or cultivation of soil, breeding and keeping of live stock
including cattle, horses, donkeys, mules, pigs, fish, poultry and bees, the use of land
which is ancillary to the farming of land or any purpose aforesaid but shall not include the
use of any land attached to a building for the purpose of garden to be used along with
such building; and ‘agriculture’ shall be construed accordingly.
2.3 ‘alteration’ means a structural change such as an addition to the area or height, or the
removal of part of building, or any change to the structure such as construction or, cutting
into or removal of any wall, partition, column, beam, joint, floor or other support, or a
change to or closing of any required means of ingress or egress.
2.4 ‘apartment’ means a part of the property intended for any type of independent use,
including one or more rooms or enclosed spaces located on one or more floors (or part or
parts thereof) in a building, intended to be used for residential purposes and with a direct
exit to a public street, road, or highway or to a common area leading to such street, road
or highway;
2.5 ‘apartment building / multi dwelling units’ means a building containing four or more
apartments / dwelling units, or two or more buildings, each containing two or more
apartments / dwelling units with a total of four or more apartments / dwelling units for all
such buildings and comprising or part of the property.
2.6 ‘applicant’ means any person who gives notice to the Authority with an intention to erect
or re-erect or alter a building.
2.7 ‘Authority’ means the Commissioner of the Bangalore Mahanagara Palike or an Officer
to whom the powers of sanction of building licences are delegated by the Commissioner.
2.8 ‘balcony’ means a horizontal cantilever projection including a handrail or balustrade, to
serve as passage or sit out place.
2.9 ‘basement storey or cellar’ means any storey, which is partly/wholly below the ground
level. The basement height should not project more than one metre above the average
ground level.
2.10 ‘ building’ includes
a) a house, out-house, stable, privy, shed, well, verandah, fixed platform, plinth, door
step and any other such structure whether of masonry, bricks, wood, mud, metal or
any other material whatsoever;
b) a structure on wheels simply resting on the ground without foundation;
c) a ship, vessel, boat, tent and any other structure used for human habitation or used
for keeping animals or storing any article or goods.
2.11 ‘building line’ means the line upto which the plinth of buildings may lawfully extend
within the plot on a street or an extension of a street and includes the line prescribed, if
any, or in any scheme.
2
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
2.12 ‘chejja’ means a continuous sloping or horizontal cantilever projection provided over an
opening or external wall to provide protection from sun and rain.
2.13 ‘chimney’ means a structure usually vertical containing a passage or flue by which the
smoke, gas, etc., of a fire or furnace are carried off and by means of which a draught is
created.
2.14 ‘commercial building’ means a building or part of a building, which is used as shops,
and/or market for display and sale of merchandise either wholesale or retail, building
used for transaction of business or the keeping of accounts, records for similar purpose;
professional service facilities, corporate offices, software services, offices of commercial
undertakings and companies petrol bunk, restaurants, lodges, nursing homes, cinema
theatres, banks, clubs run on commercial basis. Storage and service facilities incidental
to the sale of merchandise and located in the same building shall be included under this
group, except where exempted.
2.15 ‘common wall’ means
a) a wall built on land belonging to two adjoining owners, the wall being the joint
property of both owners.
b) if two adjoining owners build a dividing wall on their property they are not common
walls and no part of the footings of either wall shall project on to the land of the
adjoining owner, except by legal agreement between the owners.
c) any such ‘common’ or ‘dividing’ wall shall be considered for the purpose of these
bye-laws, as being equivalent to an external wall as far as the thickness and height
are concerned.
2.16 ‘corner plot’ means a plot facing two or more intersecting streets.
2.17 ‘corporation’ means the Bangalore Mahanagara Palike established under the Act, which
is also called as the Bangalore Mahanagara Palike.
2.18 ‘court yard’ means a space open to the sky, enclosed or partially enclosed by buildings,
boundary walls, or railings. It may be at the ground floor level, or at any other level within
or adjacent to buildings.
2.19 'covered area’ means area covered by building / buildings immediately above the plinth
level, but does not include the space covered by
a) court yard at the ground level, garden, rocky area, well and well structures, plant,
nursery, water pool, swimming pool (if uncovered) platform around a tree, tank,
fountain, bench with open top and unenclosed sides by walls and the like;
b) drainage, culvert, conduit, catch-pit, gullypit, chamber gutter and the like;
c) compound or boundary wall, gate, un-storeyed porch and portico, chejja, slide,
swing, uncovered staircase, watchman booth, pumphouse.The area covered by
watchman booth/pumphouse shall not exceed three square metres; and
d) sumptank and electric transformer.
2.20 ‘cross wall’ - means an internal wall within the building upto the roof level or lintel level.
2.21 ‘density’ means concentration of population expressed in terms of number of persons
per hectare in a particular area.
3
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
2.22 ‘detached building’ means a building, the walls and roof of which are independent of
any other building with open spaces on all sides, except the portion covered by the
garage.
2.23 ‘development’ with its grammatical variations- means the carrying out of building,
engineering, mining or other operations in, or over or under land or the making of any
material change in any building or land or in the use of any building or land and includes
sub-division of any land.
2.24 ‘development plan’ means Outline Development Plan or Comprehensive Development
Plan or Revised Comprehensive Development Plan for the City of Bangalore approved
by the Government under the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961.
2.25 ‘drain’ means any pipe or other construction emanating from a plumbing fixture unit,
traps, gullies, floor traps, etc., which carries water, or waste water in a building and
connects to the drainage system.
2.26 ‘drainage’ means the removal of any waste liquid by a system constructed for this
purpose.
2.27 ‘dwelling unit/tenement’ means an independent housing unit with separate facility for
living, cooking and sanitary requirements.
2.28 ‘exit’ means a passage, channel or means of egress from any floor to a street or other
open space of safety.
2.29 ‘external wall’ means an outer wall of the building not being a partition wall even though
adjoining a wall of another building and also a wall abutting on an interior open space of
any building.
2.30 ‘first floor’ means the floor immediately above the ground floor, on which second and
other floors follow subsequently.
2.31 ‘flatted factory’ means a premises having group of non-hazardous small industrial units
as given in schedule IA and IB having not more than 50 workers. These units may be
located in multi-storeyed buildings.
2.32 ‘floor’ means the lower surface in a storey on which one normally walks in a building.
The general term ‘floor’ does not refer basement or cellar floor and mezzanine.
2.33 ‘floor area ratio’ (FAR) means the quotient obtained by dividing the total covered area of
all floors by the area of the plot. Floor area includes the mezzanine floor also.
Total covered area of all floors
F.A.R. =
Plot area
2.34 ‘footing’ means the projecting courses at the base of a wall to spread the weight over a
large area.
2.35 ‘foundation’ means that part of structure which is below the lowest floor and which
provides support for the superstructure and which transmits the load of the superstructure
to the bearing strata.
2.36 ‘frontage’ means the measurement of the side of any site abutting the road.
2.37 ‘garage’ means a structure designed or used for the parking of vehicles.
4
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
2.38 ‘Government’ means the Government of Karnataka.
2.39 ‘ground floor’ means immediately above the level of the adjoining ground level on all
sides, sides or above the basement floor.
2.40 ‘group housing’ means more than two buildings on a plot with one or more floors and
with one or more dwelling units in each floor. They are connected by an access of not
less than 3.5m in width, if they are not approachable directly from the road.
2.41 ‘habitable room’ means a room occupied or designed for occupancy by one or more
persons for study, living, sleeping, cooking, eating, but does not include bath rooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, serving and storage pantries, corridors, cellars,
attics and spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods.
2.42 ‘hazardous buildings’ means a building or part of a building which is used for the
storage, handling, manufacture or processing of highly combustible or explosive material
or products which are liable to burn with extreme rapidity or which may produce
poisonous flames or explosives; building used for storage, handling, manufacturing or
processing of highly combustible or explosive materials or products which are liable to
burn with extreme rapidity and or which may produce poisonous fumes or explosives;
buildings used for storage, handling, manufacturing or processing materials which involve
highly corrosive, toxic or abnoxious alkalies, acids or other liquor or chemicals producing
flame, fumes and explosives, poisonous, irritant or corrosive gasses and for the storage,
handling or processing of any materials producing explosive mixtures of dust or which
result in the division of matter into fine particles subject to spontaneous ignition.
2.43 ‘head room’ where a finished ceiling is not provided, the lower side of the joists or
beams or tie-beams shall determine the clear head room.
2.44 ‘heavy industry’ means an industry employing more than 500 workers. These industries
are permissible only in accordance with the land use as per the Revised Comprehensive
Development Plan approved by the Government.
2.45 ‘height of building’ means the vertical distance measured, in the case of flat roofs from
the average level of the site to the top of the roof, and in the case of pitched roofs upto
the point where the external surface of the outer wall intersects a finished surface of the
sloping roof, and in the case of gable facing the street, the mid point between the eave-
level and the ridge. Architectural features, serving no other function except that of
decoration shall be excluded for the purpose of measuring height. Water tank, chimneys,
lift room, stair case room, and parapet are also excluded for the purpose of measuring
height.
2.46 ‘high-rise building’ means a building with ground floor plus four or more floors above
the ground floor.
2.47 ‘industrial building’ means a building wholly or partly used as a factory, for the
manufacture of products of all kinds including fabrication and assembly, power plant,
refinery, gas plant distillery, brewery, dairy, factory, workshop etc.
2.48 ‘land use’ includes the purpose to which the site or part of the site or the building or part
of the building is in use or permitted to be used by the Authority. Land use includes
zoning of land use as stipulated in the development plan and the Zoning Regulations.
2.49 ‘licence’ means a permission or authorisation in writing by the Authority to carry out work
regulated by the bye-laws.
5
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
2.50 ‘lift’ means an appliance designed to transport persons or materials between two or
more levels in a vertical or substantially vertical direction by means of a guided car
platform.
2.51 ‘light industry’ means an industry employing not more than 50 workers with power or
without power, aggregate installed power not exceeding 25 HP, and which conforms to
performance standards as given in Schedule 1B not causing excessive, injurious or
obnoxious fumes, odour, dust, effluent or other objectionable conditions.
2.52 ‘loft’ means a residual space above the floor level, which may be constructed or adopted
for storage purposes.
2.53 ‘medium industry’ medium industry which employs not more than 500 workers and
conforming to performance standards as given in Schedule 1C.
2.54 ‘mezzanine floor’ means an intermediate floor between the ground floor and first floor
only. The area of mezzanine floor shall not exceed 1/3 of covered area of ground floor.
2.55 ‘non-combustible materials’ means a material which neither burns nor gives off
inflamable vapours in sufficient quantity to ignite a pilot flame.
2.56 ‘occupancy or use group’ means the principal occupancy for which a building or a part
of the building is used or intended to be used. For the purpose of classification of a
building according to an occupancy, an occupancy shall be deemed to include subsidiary
occupancies which are contingent upon it.
Note: The building use classification and definitions applicable for the purpose of building bye-
laws and land use classification shall be based on the provisions of Zoning Regulations
approved under the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 as illustrated in
Schedule I, IA, IB and IC.
2.57 ‘open space’ means an area forming an integral part of the plot, left open to sky.
2.58 ‘owner’ includes the person for the time being receiving or entitled to receive, whether on
his own account or as an agent, power of attorney holder, trustee, guardian, manager or
receiver for another person or for any religious or charitable purpose, the rent or profits of
the property in connection with which the word is used.
2.59 ‘parapet’ means a low wall or railing built along the edge of a roof.
2.60 ‘parking space’ means an area enclosed or unenclosed, covered or open sufficient in
size to park vehicles together with a drive-way connecting the parking space with a street
or any public area and permitting the ingress and egress of the vehicles.
2.61 ‘penthouse’ means a covered space not exceeding 10 square metres on the roof of a
building which shall have atleast one side completely open without any partition.
2.62 ‘person’ includes any body of persons corporate or incorporate.
2.63 ‘plinth’ means the portion of a structure between the surface of the surrounding ground
and surface of the floor immediately above the ground.
2.64 ‘plinth area’ means the built up covered area of the building / buildings immediately
above plinth level.
2.65 ‘plinth level’ means the level of the floor of a building immediately above the surrounding
ground.
6
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
2.66 ‘plot or site’ means a continuous portion of land be demarcated by definite boundary
including the land within the curtilage of the building and forming its appurtenance, such
as out buildings, yard, court, open space, and garden attached thereto or intended to be
occupied therein.
2.67 ‘porch or portico’ means a roof cover supported on pillars or cantilevered projection for
the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular approach to a building.
2.68 ‘public and semi-public building’ means a building used or intended to be used either
ordinarily or occasionally by the public such as offices of State or Central Government or
Local authorities, a church, temple, chapel, mosque or any place of public worship,
dharmashala, college, school, library, theatre for cultural activities, public concert room,
public hall, hospital run by public institutions, public exhibition hall, lecture room or any
other place of public assembly.
2.69 ‘residential building’ means a building used or constructed or adopted to be used
wholly for human habitation and includes garages, and other out-houses necessary for
the normal use of the building as a residence.
2.70 ‘road width’ means the distance between the boundaries of a road including footways
and drains measured at right angles to the centre of the plot. In case of roads having
service roads in addition to the main roads, the width of road shall be the aggregate width
of service roads and main roads for determining FAR and No. of Floors.
2.71 ‘room height’ means the vertical distance measured between the finished floor surface
and the finished ceiling surface. Where a finished ceiling is not provided, the under side
of the joists or beams or tie-beams shall determine the upper point of measurement.
2.72 ‘registered architect/engineer / supervisor’ means a qualified Architect / Engineer /
Supervisor registered by the Authority.
2.73 ‘row housing’ means row of houses with minimum three dwelling units attached to each
other by a common wall with only front and rear open spaces.
2.74 ‘semi detached building’ means a building on two plots attached to each other by a
common or adjacent wall with open spaces (set backs) on three sides.
2.75 ‘service industry’ means an industry where services are offered with or without power. If
power is used, aggregate installed capacity shall not exceed 5 HP or the site area shall
not exceed 240 square metres. Service industries shall be permitted in the light
industries zone of the development plan as given in Schedule IA.
2.76 ‘set back line’ means a line prescribed under these bye-laws beyond which nothing can
be constructed towards the plot boundary except those not included under the definition
of coverage.
2.77 ‘stair case room’ means a room accommodating the stair and for purpose of providing
protection from weather and not used for human habitation.
2.78 ‘storey’ means the space between the surface of one floor and the surface of the other
floor vertically above or below.
2.79 ‘to abut’ in relation to the building or any portion of it means to touch the road boundary
or the adjoining plot or building.
7
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
2.80 ‘to erect’ means to construct a whole or a part of a new building on any site whether
previously built upon or not; including additions or alterations to an existing building.
2.81 ‘water closet’ means a privy with arrangements for flushing the pan with water but does
not include a bathing room.
2.82 ‘Zoning Regulations’ means Zoning of Land use and Regulations issued along with the
development plan of Bangalore City prepared under the Karnataka Town and Country
Planning Act, 1961 prescribing the uses permissible in different land use zones, the open
spaces around buildings, plot coverage, floor area ratio, height of the building, building
lines, parking etc.
Note: - The words and expressions not defined in these bye-laws shall have the same meaning
as in the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 and the Karnataka Town and
Country Planning Act, 1961.
8
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
PART II
ADMINISTRATION
3.0 BUILDING LICENCE
3.1 Licence – Every person who intends to erect or re-erect a building or make material
alterations or cause the same to be done, is required to obtain a licence from the
Authority.
3.2 Application and documents to be submitted with the application - Every person
who intends to erect or re-erect or alter a building, including temporary structures for
the purpose of exhibitions, trade fair or circus or execute any of the works other than
repairs, as specified in Sections 299, 304 or 312, of the Act, shall give an application in
writing to the Authority in the Form set forth in Schedule II and such application shall be
accompanied by plans, documents and information as required hereunder.
3.2.(1) Title deed/possession certificate – A copy of the title deed or possession certificate
of the property, issued a competent authority.
3.2.(2) Property card and latest assessment book extract – A copy of the property card
along with the sketch issued by the Department of Survey and Settlement, and Land
Records (City Survey) and latest assessment book extract issued by the Corporation
indicating the measurements of the property .
3.2.(3) Upto date tax paid receipt – The receipt for having paid up to date property tax to the
Corporation shall be enclosed.
3.2.(4) Previously sanctioned plan - Attested copy of the previously sanctioned plan if the
application is for addition/ alteration/modification to the existing building. If the applicant
for any reason cannot produce the previously sanctioned plan of the existing building,
then in such cases the plan of the existing building along with site plan, etc., will have
to be submitted.
3.2.(5) Drawings – The following drawings in ammonia prints. One drawing on tracing cloth /
polyester tracing film shall be enclosed in addition to the ammonia prints.
3.2.(5.1) Key plan – A key plan drawn to a scale of not less than 1 in 10,000 showing the
boundary locations of the site with respect to neighbourhood landmarks.
3.2.(5.2) Site plan – Site plan drawn to a scale of 1:500 for sites of area upto one hectare and
1:1000 for sites of area more than one hectare. The site plan shall indicate the
following, namely:-
a) title of drawing consisting of the property number of the site name of the block,
street or road in which the site is situated, number of the site if situated in an
approved layout, and reference number of such approval with the use of the
building;
b) the boundaries of the site and of any contiguous land belonging to the owner
thereof;
c) the north direction relative to the plan of the building;
d) the name and description of the adjacent roads, street, or lanes, if any, with the
width thereof;
9
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
e) the position of the adjacent plots whether vacant or built up;
f) the area to be occupied by the proposed building and the set backs proposed for
proper air and ventilation;
g) the nature of the ground on which the proposed building is to be erected, whether
natural like, rocky, gravelly, clayey, sandy etc., or made up ground. In the case of
made up ground, the time when it was so made up and the materials used in
making it up shall be indicated. In case of sloping ground where the gradient
exceeds 5% (1:20) block levels have to be furnished in the site plan;
h) any physical features such as wells, drains, transmission lines, etc.;
i) natural features like existing trees, ridges, valleys etc.,
j) block levels in cases where basement/cellar floors are proposed below ground
level;
k) such other particulars, as may be specified by the Authority.
3.2.(5.3) Building plan – Building plan drawn to a scale of not more than 1:100 showing the
following particulars, namely
a) floor plans of all floors indicating north line and the various parts of the building,
sizes of rooms, position of stair-cases and lifts, machine rooms, ramps etc., in
detail along with street elevation;.
b) use or occupancy of all parts of the building;
c) exact location of essential services viz., water closets, baths, sinks, etc;
d) sectional drawing showing sizes of footing, thickness of walls, spacing of columns,
thickness of roof slab, height of rooms, height of parapet, drainage and slope of
the terrace roof details of staircase showing tread, rise and landing width, railing,
etc;
e) details of ventilation of all rooms;
f) open spaces or yards inside or surrounding the buildings;
g) sewerage arrangements;
h) the schedule of all doors, windows, and ventilators showing sizes and numbers;
i) dimensions of projected portions beyond the walls like chajja, balcony, canopy, etc;
j) in case of basement floor, position of the ramp with respect to the entrance, ground
level and building, with a slope not exceeding 1 to 10, the drainage arrangements
in the basement floor, etc;
k) arrangements for vehicular parking as per standards laid down in bye-law 16.0
indicating the entry, exit of vehicles, drive way, etc;
l) such other particulars like, site area, plinth area of all buildings, areas of each floor
and total floor area, building coverage, total height of building, etc shall be
indicated;
10
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
m) The drawing must be fully dimensioned so as to have easy, quick and accurate
measurements.
3.2.(6) Licence fee receipt – Receipt for having paid to the Corporation fund licence fee as
prescribed in bye-law 3.7.1 and 3.7.2.
3.2.(7) Indemnity bond on stamp paper as prescribed by the Authority.
3.2.(8) Schedule II of the National Building Organisation duly filled in duplicate as per Schedule
XIII of these bye-laws.
3.2.(9) Foundation certificate – Foundation certificate which certifies the fitness of foundation
to bear the additional building load in respect of old buildings above which new floors are
proposed to be added which is issued by a Registered Architect / Engineer / Supervisor
specified in Schedule IV of these bye-laws.
3.2.(10) Other certificates – Certificates from the following authorities, wherever applicable.
Agency In respect of
3.2(10.1) Bangalore Development a) Commencement certificate for the change of land
Authority use in the Development Plan of Bangalore as per
section 14 & 15 of the Karnataka Town and Country
Planning Act, 1961.
b) Bifurcation or amalgamation of plot as per Section
17 of KTCP Act 1961.
c) Approval in case of buildings permissible under
special circumstances as per Schedule I.
d) Approval of layout plan in case of Group Housing
Schemes where sital area of group housing exceeds
4,000 sq. mtrs.
e) In case of civic amenity site, leased out by the
Bangalore Development Authority, commencement
certificate under sections 14 and 15 of the Karnataka
Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 for
construction of the building.
3.2 (10.2) Bangalore Water Supply & N.O.C. in case of high rise building or group
Sewerage Board housing.
3.2 (10.3) BESCOM N.O.C. in case of high rise building or group
housing.
3.2 (10.4) Fire Services Department N.O.C. in case of high rise building. (Bye-law 2.45
definition)
3.2(10.5) Airport Authority of India N.O.C. in case of high rise building.
3.2(10.6) Telecommunication N.O.C in case of high rise building above 7 floors.
Department
3.2(10.7) Karnataka Slum Clearance N.O.C. with regard to non-interference with
and Improvement Board improvement schemes, in respect of areas notified
under section. 3 of the Karnataka Slum Areas
(Improvement & Clearance) Act, 1973.
11
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
3.2(10.8) District Magistrate N.O.C. in case of permanent and/or semi permanent
cinema theatres including drive-in-theaters, and
petrol pumps.
3.2(10.9) Director of Factories and N.O.C. in case of industrial buildings
Boilers
3.2(10.10) Controller of Explosives N.O.C. in case of buildings proposed for storage or
sale of combustible articles.
3.2(10.11) Railways N.O.C. in case of buildings abutting railway margin.
3.2.(11) Supervision certificate – A certificate in the form given in Schedule III by the competent
Registered Architect / Engineer / Supervisor who shall be undertaking the supervision.
3.3 Preparation and signing of plans - All the plans shall be duly signed by the owner or
his legally authorised agent or attorney and also by the Registered Architect / Engineer /
Supervisor, and shall indicate their names and addresses, qualification and the
registration number allotted by the Authority.
3.4 Size of drawing sheets - The following sizes shall be adopted for the drawings to be
submitted.
12
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
TABLE 1
(Bye-law 3.4)
SIZES OF DRAWING SHEETS
Sl. No. Standard Trimmed size (mm) Untrimmed size (min) in mm
1 A0 841 x 1189 880 x 1230
2 A1 594 x 841 625 x 880
3 A2 420 x 594 450 x 625
4 A3 297 x 420 330 x 450
5 A4 210 x 297 240 x 330
6 A5 148 x 210 165 x 240
Any of the above convenient standard sizes may be adopted considering the details to be shown.
3.5 Colouring of plans – All the plans should be coloured as specified in Table 2 and folded to
A4 size.
TABLE 2
(Bye-law 3. 5)
Colouring of plans
Site Plan Building Plan
Sl.
Item
No. White Blue Ammonia White Blue Ammonia
Plan Print Print Plan Print Print
1 Plot lines Thick Thick Thick Thick Thick Thick
Black Black Black Black Black Black
2 Existing Street Green Green Green - - -
3 Future street if Green Green Green - - -
any dotted dotted dotted
4 Permissible Thick Thick Thick - - -
building line dotted dotted dotted
5 Open Space No No No No No No
Colour Colour Colour Colour Colour Colour
6 Existing Work Black White Blue Black White Blue
outline
7 Work proposed Yellow Yellow Yellow Yellow Yellow Yellow
to be hatched hatched hatched hatched hatched hatched
demolished
8 Proposed work Red filled Red filled Red Red Red Red
(see Note 1) in in
9 Drainage & Red Red Red Red Red Red
Sewerage work dotted dotted dotted dotted dotted dotted
10 Water Supply Black Black Black Black Black Black
work dotted dotted dotted dotted dotted dotted
thin thin thin thin thin thin
13
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
Note: (1) Item No.8 does not apply, in case of an entirely new construction on the site.
(2) For land development, sub-division, layout, suitable colouring notations shall be
used which shall be indexed.
3.6 Registration of Architects / Engineers / Supervisors – Architects / Engineers /
Supervisors referred to under these bye-laws shall be registered by the Authority as
stipulated in Schedule IV.
3.7 Building licence fee -
3.7.1 Every person intending to construct or reconstruct or alter any building under sections
299, 304 and 312, of the Act shall pay to the Corporation fund, the building licence fee as
prescribed by the Authority subject to a minimum of Rs. 300/- (Rupees three hundred
only)
Provided that no licence fee shall be payable by the Central and the State Governments
for the construction of buildings by them on their lands.
Note: The fixation of licence fee shall be governed by the following:
a) For re-erection of existing buildings, the fees chargeable shall be the same as for
the erection of new buildings.
b) For additions and alterations in the existing buildings the fees shall be chargeable
on the added portions only at the same rate applicable to the new building.
3.7.2 Part of the building licence fee which shall not be less than 5% of the licence fee and
subject to a minimum of Rs. 50/- (Rupees fifty) only shall be paid together with the
application for building licence, as scrutiny fee, which is not refundable. The balance
amount of licence fee shall be paid on receipt of demand notice from the Authority.
3.7.3 Licence fee for compound wall at Rs. one only per running meter shall be paid on receipt
of demand notice.
3.8 Ground rent - The ground rent for stocking of building materials on public land as
prescribed by the Authority without causing obstruction to movement of vehicles and
pedestrians subject to the permission of the Authority.
Note: (i) The ground rent charges shall be based on the total floor area of all the floors in the
buildings. The ground rent is valid for a period of two years only. If the building is not
completed and the occupancy certificate is not obtained within the period of two years,
further rent is to be paid at half the rate per annum or part thereof till the building is
completed.
Note: (ii) The ground rent applies only for the storing of building materials and not for any other
purpose.
Note: (iii) If the public land is utilised for storing of excavated materials and debris, separate
charges will have to be paid at four times the rate fixed as ground rent.
3.9 Ground rent for high rise buildings : High rise buildings are not exempted from
payment of ground rent irrespective of the set backs and coverage.
14
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
3.10 Exemptions for ground rent -
Ground rent may be exempted in the following cases, namely
(1) individual residential bungalows with front set back of 6 metres and more with coverage of
not more than 55 per cent.
(2) schools, colleges and other institutions with a front set back of 8 meters and more with
coverage of not more than 33.33 per cent.
(3) religious and cultural buildings with a front set back of 8 meters and more with coverage
of not more than 45 per cent.
(4) heavy industries and Government buildings with large extents of land capable of storing
the building materials within the periphery of the property.
Note: Exemption shall be granted only on production of undertaking from the applicant on a
stamped paper of Rs. 30 that the Corporation land, footpath and road will not be used for
stocking building materials as well as depositing debris and in case of violation of this
condition, they shall be liable to pay the ground rent at the normal rates in addition to the
penalty of 50 % of the amount specified which will be recovered as arrears of tax on land
and buildings, etc.
3.11.1 Construction of temporary shed - Temporary shed to be used as construction shed
may be permitted in that plot (excluding public land) along with the sanction to a building
and may be put up not earlier than a month before the commencement of the work and
shall be removed immediately after the completion of the work. Occupancy certificate for
the building shall be issued only after the removal of the temporary shed.
3.11.2 Temporary Structructres – Temporary Structruers used for running establishments of
commercial in nature, Religious and Cultural Programmes etc,., shall be permitted
according to the purpose for which these are used by the special permission of the
authority for a limited period and subject to such conditions as may be imposed in the
permission. Such temporary structrues shall be completely removed on the expiry of
period specified in it.
3.12 Demand notice -The demand notice for the payment of licence fee, ground rent and such
other fee for the issue of building licence will be valid for a period of forty five days only
from the date of issue of the notice. After the expiry of the above period, fees shall be
paid as per the revalidated demand notice. The revalidation shall be subject to the then
in force at the time of such revalidation.
3.13 Revision of licence fee and ground rent - The Licence fee and ground rent are subject
to revision from time to time by the Commissioner without notice.
4.0 GRANT OF LICENCE
4.1 Grant or refusal of licence –
4.1.1. Subject to sections 303 and 304 of the Act, the Authority, after having examined the
application for licence, may either grant the licence as per the proposal or with such
modifications or conditions as it may deem necessary or refuse licence and thereupon
shall communicate its decision to the applicant within 30 days as per KMC Act in the
proforma given in Schedule V-A or Schedule V-B.
15
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
4.1.2. While granting licence, the Authority shall impose a condition that atleast two trees shall
be grown in the sites where the sital area exceeds 200 sqm. in the interest of improving
the environment of the area.
4.1.3. The Authority may require the owner, builder, or any other person responsible for
construction of a building to erect and maintain during construction such barricading as
considered necessary to prevent dust, debris and other materials endangering the safety
of people/structures, etc., in and around the site.
4.1.4. Revised plans – (i) Where plans have been scrutinised and modifications or objections
have been pointed out by the Authority, the applicant shall modify the plans to comply
with the modifications or objections raised and resubmit the plans. The plans submitted
for approval shall not contain superimposed corrections.
(ii) A plan once sanctioned may be revised or modified by the Authority on payment of
additional fee for scrutiny, and additional fee, if any, to be paid, due to the increase in the
permissible floor area. If the modified plan is sanctioned after the commencement of
work, penalty at the rates prescribed by the Corporation shall be paid by the applicant
4.1.5. Security deposit – 1) The applicant shall deposit a sum at the rate of Rs.25/= per
sq.mtr. of floor area as refundable non-earning security and earnest deposit for the
following categories of buildings, namely:
a) Residential group housing / multi dwellings / apartments, with 5 dwelling units and more.
b) Commercial buildings exceeding 300 sq. mtrs. of total floor area.
2) The security deposit shall be refunded two years after completion of the construction as
per approved plan as certified by the Corporation. If the construction is not as per
approved plan this deposit amount would be forfeited.
4.4 Special powers of the Authority :
The Authority may direct the owner (i) to change the location of the proposed building, (ii)
to provide open space or ventilation, [iii] to use specified materials for construction, if
such measures are considered necessary keeping in view the existing or proposed power
lines, water and sewage lines passing through the site, or due to any proposed widening
of the road or formation of new roads passing through the site; which shall not be
inconsistant with the Act and the development plan;
5.0 PROCEDURE AFTER GRANT OF LICENCE
5.1 Responsibility of owner – The granting of licence, approval of the plan and
specifications, or inspections made by the Authority shall not in any way relieve the
owner of a building from full responsibility for carrying out the work in accordance with the
requirements of the sanctioned building plan along with such conditions as have been
imposed while sanctioning the licence.
5.2 Commencement of work – (i) The construction or reconstruction of a building shall be
commenced within a period of two years from the date of issue of licence. Before the
expiry of two years, the owner shall give intimation to the Authority of the intention to start
work in the form prescribed in Schedule VI. Further, the owner shall give intimation to the
Authority on completion of the foundation or footings of walls/columns on the foundation.
(ii) After the expiry of two years from the date of licence, construction or reconstruction of a
building shall not be commenced without obtaining a fresh licence from the Authority.
16
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
5.3 Inspection – (i) Generally all construction and work for which a licence is required shall
be subject to inspection by the Authority and certain types of construction involving
unusual hazards or requiring constant inspection, shall have continuous inspections by
the Authority.
(ii) Within 15 days from the date of the receipt of intimation under bye-law 5.2, the Authority
shall inspect the site to verify the line out marked for the building according to the
sanctioned plan. The owner shall commence the work after the grant of commencement
certificate in the form prescribed in Schedule VII.
(iii) If the commencement certificate is not issued within a period of 15 days from the date of
intimation by the owner, the construction may proceed according to the sanctioned plan.
5.4 Documents at sites - Where tests of any materials are required to be in conformity with
the requirements of these bye-laws, or conditions of licence, records of the test data shall
at all times be kept for inspection during the construction of the building and for such
period thereafter as may be required by the Authority.
5.5 Display of sanctioned plan and licence at construction site
i) The owner/builder/contractor shall during the construction, display the following
documents in a conspicuous place of the licensed premises;
a) A copy of the building licence; and
b) A copy of the approved plans of the property in respect of which the licence was issued
and the specifications of the building to be constructed.
ii) The building licence and the copies of sanctioned plans with specifications shall be
mounted on a frame and displayed and they shall be made available during inspections.
5.6 Occupancy certificate
5.6.1
(a) Every person shall before the expiry of five years from the date of issue of licence shall
complete the construction or reconstruction of a building for which the licence was
obtained and within one month after the completion of the erection of a building shall
send intimation to the Commissioner in writing of such completion accompanied by a
certificate in Schedule VIII certified by a Registered Architect / Engineer / Supervisor and
shall apply for permission to occupy the building. The Authority shall decide after due
physical inspection of the building (including whether the owner had obtained
commencement certificate as per section 300 of the Karnataka Municipal Corporations
Act, 1976 and compliance regarding production of all required documents including
clearance from the Fire Service Department in the case of high rise buildings at the time
of submitting application) and intimate the applicant within thirty days of receipt of the
intimation whether the application for occupancy certificate is accepted or rejected. In
case, the application is accepted, the occupancy certificate shall be issued in the form
given in Schedule IX provided the building is in accordance with the sanctioned plan.
(b) Physical inspection means the Authority shall find out whether the building has been
constructed in all respects as per the sanctioned plan and requirement of building bye-
laws, and includes inspections by the Fire Service Department wherever necessary.
17
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
(c) If the construction or reconstruction of a building is not completed within five years from
the date of issue of licence for such a construction, the owner shall intimate the
Authority, the stage of work at the expiry of five years. The work shall not be continued
after the expiry of five years without obtaining prior permission from the Authority. Such
continuation shall be permitted, if the construction or reconstruction is carried out
according to the licenced plan and if the Authority is satisfied that at least 75 percent of
the permitted floor area of the building is completed before the expiry of five years. If not,
the work shall be continued according to a fresh licence to be obtained from the
Authority.
5.6.2 For all high rise buildings, the work shall also be subject to inspection by the officers of
the Karnataka State Fire Service Department and the occupancy certificate shall be
issued only after obtaining a clearance certificate from the Director of Fire Services.
5.7 Occupancy or letting of the new buildings - No person shall occupy or allow any other
person to occupy any new building or part of a new building for any purpose whatsoever
until occupancy certificate to such buildings or part thereof has been granted by an
officer authorised to give such certificate if in his opinion in every respect the building is
completed according to the sanctioned plans and fit for the use for which it is erected.
The Authority may in exceptional cases (after recording reasons) allow partial occupancy
for different floors of a building .
6.0 Deviations during Construction
i) Wherever any construction is in violation/deviation of the sanctioned plan, the
Commissioner may, if he considers that the violations / deviations are within 5% of (1) the
set back to be provided around the building, (2) plot coverage (3) floor area ratio and (4)
height of the building and that the demolition under chapter XV of the Act is not feasible
without affecting structural stability, he may regularise such violations/deviations after
recording detailed reasons for the same.
ii) Violation/deviation as at 6.0 (i) above may be regularised only after sanctioning the
modified plan recording thereon the violations/deviations and after the levy of fee
prescribed by the Corporation from time to time.
iii) Regularisation of violations / deviations under this provision are not applicable to the
buildings which are constructed without obtaining any sanctioned plan whatsoever and
also the violations / deviations which are made inspite of the same being specifically
deleted or rejected in the sanctioned plan.
18
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
PART III
GENERAL BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
7.0 Requirements of building sites
7.1 No piece of land shall be used as a site for the construction of buildings under the
following circumstances:
a) if the site is not drained properly or is incapable of being well drained;
b) if the Authority considers that the site is insanitary or it is dangerous to construct a
building on it;
c) if the building is proposed on any area filled up with filthy and offensive matter without a
certificate from the Health Officer and Corporation Engineer to the effect that it is fit to be
built upon from health and sanitary point of view;
d) if the site is within a distance of nine meters from the water spread area of a tank at full
tank level;
e) if the owner of the building has not shown to the satisfaction of the Authority that all the
measures required to safeguard the construction from constantly getting damp are being
taken.;
f) if the building is for an office or public building including school, theatre or assembly on a
site which has not been previously approved by the Authority;
g) if the construction of the building thereon is for public worship which in the opinion of the
Authority may offend the religious feelings of any class of persons in the vicinity thereof;
or which may cause obstruction to the traffic.
h) if the use of the said site is for the purpose of establishing a factory, warehousing, or work
place which in the opinion of the Authority will be a source of annoyance to the health
and comfort of the inhabitants of the neighbourhood;
i) if it violates any provisions of development plan and Zoning Regulations and
j) if the plot is a revenue site for which permission under the Karnataka Land Revenue Act,
1964 is not obtained under section 95 thereof.
Note: i) Every application for a factory, workshop or work place if it is proposed to employ and
use power shall also satisfy the conditions of section 354 of the Act and specific
permission thereunder shall be obtained.
(ii)If the proposed use of the building on the site does not conform to the land use
proposals of the development plan or zoning regulations, permission from the Bangalore
Development Authority (a) for the change of land use and (b) for the sub-division of plot,
have to be furnished.
7.2 No Plan shall be sanctioned for a residential detached building on a plot measuring less
than 50 sqm. or having width less than 6 metres. In specific cases of sites for housing
schemes for EWS, LIG, Slum Clearance and Improvement Schemes as well as
reconstruction in case of densely populated areas, and plot sub-divided due to family
partitions, the Authority may relax the above conditions.
7.3 The sites which are not located in the approved layouts of the Bangalore Development
Authority, shall have sanction for their sub-divisions under section 17 of the Karnataka
Town and Country Planning Act, 1961, from the Bangalore Development Authority.
19
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
7.4 Distance of building from electrical lines
No building shall be erected below an electrical line, as well as within the horizontal
distance from the electrical line indicated in the Table 3. The vertical distance below the
level of the electrical line and the topmost surface of the building corresponding to the
minimum horizontal distance, shall be as indicated in Table 3. The minimum vertical
clearance is not applicable if the horizontal distance exceeds the minimum prescribed.
TABLE 3
(Bye-law 7.4)
Distance of buildings from electrical lines
Electrical Lines Vertical Horizontal
clearance in clearance in
Meters Meters
a) Low and medium voltage lines service lines upto 11 2.5 1.2
KV
b) High voltage lines upto and including 11 KV 3.7 1.2
c) High voltage line above 11 and upto and including 3.7 2.0
33 KV
7.4.1 To provide a space for locating the distribution transformers and associated equipment
as per KERC (ES & D) code leaving 3.0 mtrs from the building within the premises where
the specified load is 25KW or more and also in MS Buildings.
8.0 Means of access.
8.1 The means of exclusive access other than thorough public roads and streets, shall not be
of more than 30 meters in length from a public road or street. The minimum width of such
access shall be 3.5 meters. F.A.R. and height of buildings coming up on such plots
connected by means of exclusive access shall be regulated according to the width of
public street or road. If the means of access exceeds 30.00 mtrs in length, FAR shall be
regulated with reference to the width of such access road. Construction of buildings on
plots with common access / lanes from the public road / street shall be regulated
according to the width of such common access roads / lanes.
8.2 Existing conservancy lanes are not allowed to be used as means of access to the
properties.
8.3 No building shall be erected so as to obstruct the means of access of any other building.
8.4 No person shall erect a building so as to encroach upon the means of access.
8.5 The means of access shall be clearly shown in the plans submitted indicating the width,
length from the public road, width of the public road from which the access is taken etc.
8.6 Every such means of access shall be drained and lighted to the satisfaction of the
Authority and manhole covers or other drainage, water or any other fittings, laid in such
means of access shall flush with the finished surface level so as not to obstruct the safe
movement.
8.7 The existing width of the means of access shall not be reduced in any case.
20
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
9.0 OPEN SPACES, COVERAGE AND FLOOR AREA RATIO.
9.1 Open spaces – Every room intended for human habitation shall abut on an interior or
exterior open space or open verandah open to such interior or exterior open space.
9.2 Exterior open spaces/ set backs, coverage, floor area ratio, numbers of floors and
heights - The set backs required on all the sides of building/s, maximum plot coverage,
maximum FAR, maximum number of floors, maximum height of buildings that are
permissible for different dimensioned sites and widths of roads are set out in Tables 4, 5
and 6 given below.
21
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
TABLE 4
(Bye-law 9.2)
EXTERIOR OPEN SPACES/SETBACKS IN METRES FOR RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL,
PUBLIC & SEMI-PUBLIC, TRAFFIC & TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDINGS
UPTO 9.5 MTRS. IN HEIGHT
T & T. P.U.& T & T. P.U. &
Depth of
Residential Commercial Public and Width of site Residential Comercial Public and
site in
Semi-Public in mtrs. Semi Public
mtrs.
Front Rear Front Rear Front Rear Left Right Left Right Left Right
Upto 6 1.00 - 1.00 - 1.50 - Upto 6 - 1.00 - - - 1.50
Over 6 1.00 1.00 1.50 - 1.50 1.50 Over 6 1.00 1.00 - 1.50 1.50 1.50
upto 9 upto 9
Over 9 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50 3.00 1.50 Over 9 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.75 1.50
upto 12 upto 12
Over 12 3.00 1.50 3.00 1.50 3.00 1.50 Over 12 1.50 3.00 1.50 3.00 2.00 3.00
upto 18 upto 18
Over 18 4.00 3.00 3.50 3.00 4.50 2.00 Over 18 2.50 3.50 2.50 4.00 3.00 3.00
upto 24 upto 24
Over 24 5.00 3.50 4.50 3.00 6.00 3.00 Over 24 3.00 4.00 3.00 4.50 3.50 4.50
Abbreviations T & T = Traffic & Transportation, P.U. = Public utility.
22
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
TABLE 5
(Bye-law 9.2)
EXTERIOR OPEN SPACES/SET-BACKS FOR RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, PUBLIC AND
SEMI-PUBLIC, TRAFFIC & TRANSPORTATION , PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDINGS
– ABOVE 9.5 MTS. IN HEIGHT
Exterior open spaces /
set-backs to be left on all
Sl. No. Height of Building in mtrs.
sides (Front, Rear and Sides)
in mtrs.
1 Above 9.5 upto 12 4.5
2 Above 12 upto 15 5.0
3 Above 15 upto 18 6.0
4 Above 18 upto 21 7.0
5 Above 21 upto 24 8.0
6 Above 24 upto 27 9.0
7 Above 27 upto 30 10.0
8 Above 30 upto 35 11.0
9 Above 35 upto 40 12.0
10 Above 40 upto 45 13.0
11 Above 45 upto 50 14.0
12 Above 50 16.0
23
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
TABLE 6
(Bye-law 9.2 and 9.10)
COVERAGE AND FAR FOR RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC,
TRAFFIC & TRANSPORTATION, AND PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING
Public & Semi
Residential Commercial Public T&T &
Plot Public Utilities
Road width
Area in Plot Plot Plot
(Mtrs)
Sq. mtr. Cove- F.A.R. Cove- F.A.R. Cove- F.A.R
rage Max. Rage Max. rage Max.
Max. Max. Max.
A – INTENSELY DEVELOPED AREA
Upto 240 65% 0.75 65% 1.00 60% 1.00 Upto 6
Over 240
Upto 500 60% 0.75 60% 1.00 55% 1.00 Over 6 upto 9
Over 500
Upto 750 60% 1.00 60% 1.25 50% 1.00 Over 9 upto 12
Over 750
Upto 1000 60% 1.00 60% 1.25 50% 1.25 Over 12 upto 15
Over 1000 60% 1.25 55% 1.50 45% 1.25 Over 15
B – MODERATELY DEVELOPED AREA
Upto 240 65% 1.00 65% 1.25 60% 1.00 Upto 9
Over 240
Upto 500 60% 1.25 60% 1.50 55% 1.25 Over 9 upto 12
Over 500
Upto 750 60% 1.25 60% 1.50 50% 1.25 Over 12 upto 15
Over 750
Upto 1000 60% 1.50 60% 1.75 50% 1.50 Over 15 upto 18
Over 1000 60% 1.75 55% 1.75 45% 1.50 Over 18
C - SPARSELY DEVELOPED AREA
Upto 240 65% 1.00 65% 1.25 60% 1.25 Upto 9
Over 240
Upto 500 60% 1.25 60% 1.50 55% 1.50 Over 9 upto 12
Over 500
Upto 750 60% 1.50 60% 1.75 50% 1.50 Over 12 upto 15
Over 750 60% 1.50 60% 1.75 50% 1.80 Over 15 upto 18
upto 1000
Over 1000 60% 2.00 55% 2.00 45% 1.80 Over 18
24
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
Note 1: The dimensions in British system if any, adopted for the dimensions of plots
may be interpreted as follows in Metric system and set backs may be
applied accordingly.
20’-0” – 6.0 m
30’-0” – 9.0 m
40’-0” – 12.0 m
50’-0” – 15.0 m
60’-0” – 18.0 m
80’-0” – 24.0 m
Note 2 : The open spaces to be provided shall conform to the height necessary to consume the
permissible FAR.
Note 3: (a) The front and rear set backs shall be with reference to the depth of the site.
(b) The left and right set backs shall be with reference to the width of the site.
(c) If the height of a building exceeds 9.5 metres, the set backs to be provided shall be
higher of the set backs specified in tables 4 and 5.
Note 4 : Building lines have been prescribed to certain roads by the Bangalore Development
Authority in Table 33 of the Zoning Regulations. This table is appended as Schedule
X to these bye-laws. In such cases, the front set back or the building line which is
higher of the two shall be provided.
Note 5 : In the case of corner sites both the sides facing the road shall be treated as front side
and regulations applied accordingly to maintain the building line on these roads and to
provide better visibility.
Note 6 : In the case of a building facing more than two roads, the plot should be considered as
corner plot taking two wider roads into consideration.
Note 7 : In the case of sites facing roads both in front and rear, both the sides facing roads
should be treated as front and other two sides not facing roads should be treated as
right and the setbacks be applied accordingly.
Note 8 : In case where the plinth of the building is not parallel to the property line, the setbacks
shall not be less than the specified setbacks at any given point on any side.
Note 9 : In case of irregular plots the set-backs are to be calculated according to the depth or
width at the points where the depths or widths are varying. Average set-backs shall
not be considered in such cases.
Note 10 : The left and right set-backs may be interchanged by the Authority in exceptional cases
due to existing structures like; open well and also considering the topography of the
land. However, this shall be resorted to by the Authority only as an exception.
Note 11: Set-backs should be provided in the owner’s plot. Public open space or conservancy
should not be considered as set-backs.
Note 12: In case of two or more buildings proposed on a single site, the set-backs shall be
applied by considering them as a common building. In such cases, the distance
between the two buildings shall be minimum of half the height of the taller building.
Note 13: For plots with an area of more than 750 sqm. bell mouth entrance shall be provided.
Note 14: The front set back mentioned above are minimum. The building shall be shifted back
to the building lines, if any declared by any competent authority.
25
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
9.3 High rise buildings.
9.3.1 In the case of ‘high-rise buildings’ the minimum set-back all-round the building shall be as
in Table 5.
9.3.2 Minimum depth or width of a site for high rise buildings shall be 21 mtrs.
9.3.3. Minimum road width facing a high rise building shall be 12mts.
9.4 Garages
9.4.1. For the buildings upto a height of 9.50 metres, one garage may be permitted in the rear
right hand corner of the plot without right and rear set backs, if the following requirements
are fulfilled, namely
a) height of the garage does not exceed 3.00 Metres from the ground level;
b) not more than one upper floor is proposed over such a garage;
c) height of the garage and the upper floor, if any, is limited to 6.50 Metres from the
ground level;
d) no other structure is proposed over upper floor of the garage;
e) no openings are provided in the garage and its upper floor towards the
neighbouring buildings;
f) the upper floor is accessible only from lower floor;
g) not exceeding one side door is provided to the garage at the ground level
towards the rear setback of the building;
h) no other structures except one lumber room and a stair case are provided in the
rear side of the garage;
i) depth of the lumber room does not exceed 1.25 Metres;
j) length of the garage including the lumber room and stair case does not exceed
one third of the length of the site or 6 Metres, whichever is less;
k) width of the garage does not xceed 4 metres;
l) the distance from the outer surface of the garage to the plot boundary is not less
than 4.50 metres;
m) in the case of corner plots, the garage is located at the rear corner diagonally
opposite to the road intersection.
9.4.2. A Garage not exceeding 3.00 metres width may be permitted as part of the main building
with minimum setbacks applicable to such a building, provided such a garage is not
located at the intersection of roads in the case of corner sites. The length of the garage
shall not exceed one third of the length of the corresponding side of the site or 6.00
metres, whichever is less.
9.5 Provision of ramp in setback :
A ramp provided from surface level of the site to the basement floor shall have a
minimum width of 3.50 meters and slope of not more than 1 in 10. The ramp shall have a
margin of two meters kept free from the adjacent properties. The gradient of a ramp shall
start after leaving a minimum distance of one metres from the front boundary of the plot.
26
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
In the case of high rise buildings, the ramp may be provided in the set back area without
affecting the free movement of fire tenders.
9.6 Application of land use :
9.6.1. Where the nomenclature of a road differs from the one mentioned in the district maps of
the development plan, the location of the site may be considered to determine the land
use.
9.6.2. In cases of permitted land use, the Zoning Regulations shall be applied to a building
keeping in view the use of the proposed building without reference to the land use of the
Zone. However, the front set back shall be the higher of the one prescribed for that
particular zone or the one prescribed for the use permitted in the zone.
Example: If residential permission is granted in a commercial zone, the regulations applicable to
residential use only be adopted except maintaining the higher of the front set back
applicable either to commercial or residential use.
9.6.3. The land use indicated towards the road side of a property shall be the land use for the
entire property (one property depth) without identifying it for different uses by measuring
as per the scale of the maps.
9.6.4. Different uses permitted in a given zone may be allowed in different floors of the building.
In such cases, the regulations applicable to the use of the ground floor of the building
shall apply to the entire building. When mixed land uses are permitted in the ground floor,
the predominent use among them shall be considered as the use of the ground floor.
9.7 Plots facing the roads proposed for widening :
Where upper floors are permitted over the existing buildings which are sanctioned prior to
the coming into force of these bye-law s and which are facing the roads proposed for
widening in the development plan, the upper floors shall be limited to the proposed line of
road widening or building line, if any prescribed.
9.8 Additions, alterations and modifications :
i) Any additions, alterations & modifications to existing buildings shall be permitted in
accordance with these bye-laws.
ii) In case of the buildings which are existing prior to coming into force of these regulations,
upper floors may be permitted according to the existing set-backs only, but limiting the
F.A.R. and the number of floors according to the present bye-laws, subject to production
of the foundation certificate as prescribed in the bye-law no. 3.2 (9).
9.9 Interior open spaces – The whole of one side of one or more rooms intended for human
habitation and not abutting on any of the front, rear or side open spaces shall abut on an
interior open space of minimum width of 3 m.
9.10 Limitations of floor area and covered area
9.10.1 The coverage, and FAR, for different sizes of plots with reference to existing road width
as limiting factor are given in the table No.6 for various types of buildings like residential,
commercial, public and semi-public, etc. The local planning area of Bangalore City is
divided into A, B & C areas by the Bangalore Development Authority for the purpose of
regulating building constructions as under:-
A: Intensely developed area.
B: Moderately developed area.
27
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
C: – Sparsely developed area .
Note: (1) A map showing the details of A, B and C areas is available in the office of the
Bangalore Development Authority, Bangalore.A copy of this map is appended to these
bye-law s.
Note: (2) When two sides of the same road are included in two different areas like: A and B or A
and C, then both the sides shall be treated as intensively developed area (‘A’ area) up
to one property depth.
Note: (3) When two sides of the same road are included in two different areas like: B and C, then
both the sides shall be treated as moderately developed area (‘B’ area) up to one
property depth.
9.10.2 In respect of the following buildings, the maximum coverage shall be as prescribed below.
Building Permissible maximum coverage
a. Hospital 25%
b. Health centre/nursing home 33.33%
c. Nursery school/primary school 33.33%
d. Secondary school 30%
e. College 25%
9.10.3 (a) The floor area of a building shall be the aggregate area of the floors of all parts of
the building including thickness of walls, parking area, staircase rooms, lift rooms,
ramps, escalators, machine rooms, balconies, ducts including sanitary ducts, water
tanks, lobbies, corridors, foyers and such other parts provided for common service.
(b) The floor area ratio shall exempt the floor area used for the following purposes,
namely:-
(i) parking space (ii) staircase rooms (iii) lift rooms (iv) ramps (v) escalators (vi)
machine rooms (vii) open balconies (viii) ducts including sanitary ducts and (ix)
water tanks.
(c) Parking area shall be exempted to the extent required for the building.
(d) The area covered by the following structures on the roof are exempted from the
floor area upto fifteen percent of the area of the roof over which they are erected,
namely:-
(i) staircase rooms (ii) lift machine rooms (iii) pent house (iv) water tanks (v)
equipments for ventilation, air conditioning and similar services.
(e) Lobbies, corridors provided in the plan shall be considered for F.A.R.
(f) The nomenclature of certain roads may differ with those mentioned in the District
Maps of the Revised C.D.P. In such cases, the location of the site may be
considered to determine the land use.
Note : One penthouse only is permissible for a building. The area of the penthouse with
staircase room shall be limited to 19 sq.mtrs. If this limit is exceeded, the structures shall
be considered for reckoning the FAR.
9.10.4 When sites do not face the roads of required width noted against each, then the FAR
applicable to the corresponding width of roads shall apply.
28
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
9.10.5 When a site faces wider road than the one prescribed against it, the FAR shall be
restricted only to the limit prescribed for the area of that particular site.
9.10.6 When coverage is less than the maximum prescribed in Table 6, floors and height
beyond the limits indicated in table 5 may be permitted to utilise the full FAR subject to
the provision of minimum set backs prescribed in Tables 4 and 5, whichever is
applicable.
9.10.7 The set-backs and coverage shall be determined irrespective of the width of the road.
9.10.8 Buildings for cinemas - Setbacks and other requirements for permanent or other
cinema buildings shall be in accordance with the Karnataka Cinemas (Regulation) Act
1964 and the rules made there under. No building other than a cinema theatre shall be
permitted on the sites of cinema theatres unless such buildings are permissible under the
above said Act.
9 .10.9 Minimum Road Width for Kalyana Mantapas –
TABLE - 6A
Site Area Minimum Road width
a) Upto 250 Sq.Mtrs. 9.00 Mtrs
b) Over 250 Upto 500 Sq.Mtrs 12.00 Mtrs
c) Over 500 Upto 1000 Sq.Mtrs 15.00 Mtrs
d) Over 1000 Sq.Mtrs 18.00 Mtrs
10.0 Semi-detached houses (back to back or side to side) - Setbacks, coverage, floor area
ratio and road width in respect of semi-detached houses shall be as indicated in Table 7.
TABLE 7
(Bye-law 10.0)
SEMI-DETACHED HOUSES
(back to back or side to side)
1. Min. combined area of the : 140 sq. mtr.
neighbouring plots
2. Coverage :
3. Floor area ratio : As applicable to
4. Maximum number of floors : Individual plots
5. Minimum road width :
6. Front setbacks for back to back plots : Shall be equal to the sum of the front and
the rear set backs of individual plots
7. Side set back for plots joined at the : On a plot on which a semi detached building
side is proposed the left and the right side
setbacks shall be the same as required for
the total width of the combined plot treating
it is an individual site
29
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
11.0 Row housing: Row housing shall have a minimum of three dwelling units and a
maximum of 12 dwelling units on one site. Other stipulations are prescribed in Table 8
TABLE 8
(Bye-law 11.0)
Row housing
1. Min. combined area of plot : 210 sq. mtr.
2. Max. area of each plot : 108 sq. mtr
3. Coverage :
4. Floor area ratio : As applicable to
5. Number of floors : Individual plots
6. Minimum road width :
7. Setbacks min. Front : 2.00 m
Rear : 1.50 m
Side : 2.00 only for end units
12.0 GROUP HOUSING
12.1 Norms for Approval of Group Housing Plan
The following norms shall be adopted while approving the layout plan for group housing:-
i) The boundary roads if any must have a minimum width of 12 mtr.
ii) The FAR should be considered with reference to the width of the public road abutting the
property and the FAR should be calculated after deducting the area reserved for parks,
open spaces and civic amenities.
iii) The set-backs should be provided with reference to depth and width of total plot area.
iv) The coverage shall be with reference to total area of the layout.
v) The distance between the buildings should be a minimum of half of the hieght of the
tallest building.
vi) 25% of the total area be reserved for CA, parks and open spaces, subject to a minimum
of 15% for parks and open space.
vii) The means of access to the building blocks in the area of group housing shall be as
follows:
Access length in mtrs. Min. width
a) Less than 100 mtrs. 6 mtrs.
b) 100 to 200 mtrs. 9 mtrs.
c) More than 200 mtrs. 12 mtrs.
vii) The area reserved for Parks and Open spaces, CA and roads (other than internal access
in each sub-divided plot) shall be handed over free of cost to the B.D.A through registered
relinquishment deed before issue of work order.
30
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
12.2 Stipulations for group housing - Stipulations for group housing are indicated in the
Table 9.
TABLE 9
(Bye-law 12.0)
GROUP HOUSING
The Table showing the maximum plot coverage FAR, minimum setbacks and minimum
road width for Group Housing is given below.
Plot Area Minimum Maximum Maximum Minimum Set-backs in Meters
Road plot FAR
width in coverage
Mtrs.
Front Rear Left Right
Upto 0.40 Hectares 12 60% 2.00 5.0 4.5 4.5 5.0
Between 0.40 & 0.80 15 60% 2.25 8.0 6.0 6.0 6.0
Hectares
Above 0.80 Hectares 18 60% 2.50 9.0 8.0 8.0 8.0
NOTE: 1) Group housing means more than two buildings on a plot with one or more floors and
with one or more dwelling units in each floor. They are connected by an access of
not less than 3.5 mtrs. in width, if they are not approachable directly from the
existing roads.
2) Where the sital area o group housing exceeds 4000 sq.mtrs. approval of layout
showing the general arrangement of residential building blocks, and dimesnsions of
plot earmarked for each building blocks, means of access roads and civic amenity
areas, should preceed the approval to building plan.
3) In case, the height of group housing building exeed 9.5m, then set back to be left
alround the premises shall be as er Table 23 or Table 25 whichever is higher.
13.0 Industrial buildings:
13.1 Exterior setbacks, coverage and FAR for industrial buildings with reference to different
road widths shall be as indicated in Table 10.
13.2 The minimum plot area, maximum plot coverage, maximum FAR and minimum set backs
for flatted factories shall be as specified in Table 11.
31
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
TABLE 10
(Bye-law 13.1)
EXTERIOR SET-BACKS, COVERAGE AND F.A.R. FOR
INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS
Maximum Road width
Industry Min. set back in Mtrs. F.A.R.
Plot Area plot coverage In mtrs.
in sq. mtrs Rear &
Front
sides
Upto 240 Service 75% 1.00 - 1.00 Over 4.5
Over 240 Service and Light
50% 4.50 4.50 0.75 Over 6.0
upto 1000
Over 1000 Service and Light
upto 2000 50% 6.00 6.00 0.75 Over 9.0
Over 2000 Service, Light and
upto 3000 Medium 40% 10.00 10.00 0.75 Over 12.0
Over 3000 Service, Light and
upto 4000 Medium 40% 12.00 12.00 0.50 Over 12.0
Over 4000 Service, Light,
Medium and
Heavy 35% 15.00 15.00 0.50 Over 12.0
Note: After leaving minimum set-backs as per the above table, if the remaining portion of the plot
cannot be used for erecting the building, the Authority may insist the set backs applicable for
residential buildings.
TABLE 11
(Bye-law 13.2)
REGULATIONS FOR FLATTED FACTORIES
1. Minimum plot area : 1000 sq. mtrs.
2. Maximum coverage : 40%
3. Maximum F.A.R. : 1.50 upto 9 mtrs. road width,
and
1.75 above 9 mtrs. road width
4. Minimum setbacks : a. Front 8.0 mtrs.
b. Rear 4.5 mtrs.
c. Sides 4.5 mtrs.
Note: If the height of the building exceeds 9.5 metres, the minimum set back shall be the higher
of the two in Tables 5 and 11.
14. Exemptions in open space - The following exemptions in open space shall be permitted.
14.1 Projections - (1) Every open space provided either interior or exterior shall be kept free
from any structure thereon and shall be open to sky and no cornice, roof or weather shade
or chajja more than 0.75 metres wide or 1/3 of open space whichever is less shall over-hang
or project over the said open space. These projections shall be permitted within one’s own
plot boundaries.
32
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
(II) No projection shall over hang or project over the minimum setback area either in the
cellar floor or at the lower level of the ground floor.
14.2 Cantilever Portico - A cantilever portico of 3 metres width (maximum) and 4.5 metres
length (maximum) may be permitted in the ground floor within the side set back. No
access is permitted to the top of the portico for using it as a sit out. Height of the portico
shall be not less than 2 metres from the plinth level. The terrace of the portico shall be
open to sky. The portico when allowed shall have a clear open space of one meter from
the boundary of the property.
14.3 Balcony - The projection of the balcony shall be measured perpendicular to the building
upto the outermost edge of the balcony. Cantilever projection of the balcony shall be
permitted not exceeding 1/3 of the setback subject to a maximum of 1.1 mtrs. in the first
floor and 1.75 metres in and above the second floor. No balcony is allowed at the ground
floor level. The length of the balcony shall be limited to 1/3 of the length of each side of
the building.
14.4 Cross wall - A cross wall connecting the building and the boundary wall may be
permitted limiting the height of such wall to 1.5 mtr.
15.0 Height limitation
15.1 The height of the building shall be governed by the limitation of the FAR, coverage,
setbacks and the width of the street facing the plot as stipulated in the respective tables.
15.2 If a building abuts two or more streets of different widths, then the height of the building
shall be regulated according to the width of the wider road.
15.3 For buildings within the landing and take off zones of air craft in the vicinity of
aerodromes, the maximum height of the building shall be as permissible in 15.1 above, or
as shown in Table 12 whichever is lower. These shall be regulated by the rules for the
construction of buildings in the vicinity of aerodromes by the competent Aerodrome
Authority.
15.4 Height exception for the structures on roof: The following appurtenant structures shall
not be included in the height of the building.
i) Water tanks and their supports, equipments for ventilation, air-conditioning and similar
services, lift rooms, roof structures like; stair-case room, pent house, chimneys, parapet
walls and other architectural features.
ii) The height of parapet wall and architectural features shall not exceed 1.0 metre and the
height of other structures shall not exceed 4.50 meters for claiming the height exemption.
iii) The aggregate area of such structures shall be limited to the extent prescribed in the bye-
law 9.10.3 (d). If this limit is exceeded, the structures shall be considered for reckoning
the height of the building.
33
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
TABLE 12
(Bye-law 15.3)
HEIGHT LIMITATIONS IN THE VICINITY OF AERODROMES
(a) International civil air-ports and their alternates:
Limits of distance from the Difference between the elevation of the top of
aerodromes point measured the buildings/structures of installations and the
horizontally to buildings/structures or elevation of the aerodromes (aerodromes
installations reference point)
1 Between 8534 M and 22224 M Less than 152 M
2 Between 7315 M and 8534 M Less than 122 M
3 Between 6096 M and 7315 M Less than 91 M
4 Between 4877 M and 6096 M Less than 61 M
5 Between 4267 M and 4877 M Less than 49 M
6 Between 3658 M and 4267 M Less than 37 M
7 Between 3048 M and 3658 M Less than 24 M
8 Between 2438 M and 3048 M Less than 12 M
9 Below 2438 mtrs. Nil except with the prior concurrence of
the local Aerodrome Authority
(b) other civil airports and civil aerodromes:
1 Between 7925 M and 22324 M Less than 152 M
2 Between 6706 M and 7925 M Less than 122 M
3 Between 5486 M and 6706 M Less than 91 M
4 Between 4267 M and 5486 M Less than 61 M
5 Between 3658 M and 4267 M Less than 49 M
6 Between 3048 M and 3658 M Less than 37 M
7 Between 2438 M and 3048 M Less than 24 M
8 Between 1829 M and 2438 M Less than 12 M
9 Below 1829 M Nil except with the prior concurrence of the local
Aerodrome Authority.
Note: 1) For sl. Nos. (7), (8) and (9), no trees shall be planted within the limits of the distance
indicated thereto.
2) Irrespective of the distance from the aerodrome beyond 22,224 mtrs. of the
aerodrome/aerodrome reference point, no radio masts or such similar type of
installations exceeding 152 mtrs. in height should be erected with out prior
permission of the concerned civil aviation authority.
3) No buildings structures or installations exceeding the height indicated in (a) and (b) of
Table 12 should be permitted without prior consultation with the local authority.
34
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
4) Location of slaughter houses, butcheries and other areas of activities like garbage
dumps which would attract high flying birds like eagles, hawks etc., shall not be
permitted within a radius of 10 kilometres. from the aerodrome reference point.
16.0 Parking space - Adequate space for the parking of vehicles shall be provided in the
sites as per standards given in Table 13 subject to the following stipulations.
a) Each off street car parking space provided for motor vehicles shall not be less than 18
sq.mtrs (3 meters x 6 meters). For motor cycles and scooters, each parking space shall
not be less than 2.5 sq.mtrs. (1.25 meters x 2 meters) and for cycles it shall not be less
than 1.5 sq.metres. (0.75 meters x 2 meters).
b) Off street car parking space shall be provided with adequate vehicular access to a street
and areas of drives of not less than 2.5 mtr. wide, aisles and such other provisions
required for adequate monitoring of vehicles shall be exclusive of the parking space
stipulated in these bye-laws.
c) No parking space shall be insisted upon in the intensely developed area of the floor
space upto 100 sq.meters.
d) In case of non-high rise buildings parking space may be provided in the set back,
where the set- back is 6 meters. In such cases, the minimum margin of 3 meters shall
be kept free from the building.
e) In case of high rise buildings parking space may be provided in the set back after
leaving a minimum setback of 6 Mtrs alround the building to enable movement of Fire
Tender.
f) Alternate means of parking such as terrace parking, multi stage parking, parking silos
may be permitted, subject to production of NOC’s from the Authorities (in case of high
rise buildings). In such cases, a clear height of 3.6 Meters in the basement floor has to
be provided, and the space to be earmarked per unit of Car parking may be determined
by the authority.
g) Parking in the upper floors can be allowed only if ramps are provided after leaving the
minimum setback line to reach such floors.
h) Parking to be allowed on stilts should not be considered as a separate floor and the
same shall be exempted from computing the height of the building provided the total
height of the building does not exceed 15.00 Mtrs.
35
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
TABLE 13
(Bye-law 16.0)
PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Sl. One car parking space shall be provided for
Type of use
No. every
1 a) Theatres and auditoriums 25 seats of accommodation subject to a
including cinema theatres (except minimum of 20
educational institutions); 15 seats of accommodation subject to a
b) Multiplex Theaters minimum of 10
2 Retail business 50 sq. mtr. of floor area
3 Wholesale and warehouse buildings 150 sq. mtr of floor area plus 1 lorry parking
space measuring 4 x 8 mtrs. for every 500
sq.mtr. or part thereof.
4 Restaurants, Establishments 25 sq.mtr. of floor area including hall, dining
serving food and drinks and such room, pantry & bar.
other establishments
5 Lodging establishments and tourist 4 rooms
homes
6 Office-buildings (Govt./Semi-Govt. 50 sq.mtrs. of office floor space.
& Pvt.)
7 Hostels 10 rooms
8 Industrial buildings 100 sq.mtr. of floor area plus 1 lorry space
measuring 4 x 8 mtr. For every 1000
sq.mtr. or part thereof.
9 Nursing homes & Hospitals 4 beds
10 (i) Single Family Dwellings a) Dwelling Unit measuring 100 to 150
Sq.Mtrs
b) 100 Sq.Mtrs and Part thereof beyond
150 Sq.Mtrs.
(ii) Multi Family Dwellings a) 2 Dwelling units measuring 50 Sq.Mtrs or
less.
b) Dwelling unit measuring over 50 Sq.Mtrs
upto 150 Sq.Mtrs.
c) 100 Sq.Mtrs and part thereof beyond 150
Sq.Mtrs
11 Kalyana mandiras 10 sq.mtr. of auditorium floor area
12 Recreation clubs 50 sq.mtr. of floor area
13 Educational buildings 200 sq.mtr. of floor area
14 Other public and semi-public 100 sq. mtr. Of floor area
buildings
NOTE: In addition to the above 10% additional parking space shall be provided for parking of
visitor’s vehicle’s in case of residential and commercial buildings at serial numbers 5,
6, 7, 9, 10(ii), 12, 13 and 14.
17.0 Buildings at intersection of streets - At the intersection of streets, the corners of the
boundary of the plot shall be rounded off or cut-off after leaving a minimum distance of
10% of the frontage of the plot or 3 mts whichever is less from the point of intersection.
The Authority may further require the corner of the building to be rounded off or cut-off
36
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
parallel to the rounded off or cut-off boundary upto the height of the ground floor. In such
cases the FAR is to be allowed for the total area of the plot. Entry or exit for the buildings
shall be provided away from the point of intersection.
18.0 Basement floor
18.1 a) Basement floors shall not be used for purposes other than parking and for locating
machines used for service and utilities of buildings.
b) Strong rooms only in case of bank buildings. The area to be used for this purpose
shall be reckoned for FAR purposes.
c) Installation of Radiology and X ray equipment only in case of Hospital buildings
having a capacity of more than 50 beds without office. The area to be used for this
purpose shall be reckoned for FAR purposes.
18.2 One basement in the intensely populated are (A Zone) be permitted only for parking
purpose, if the area of the premises is 500 sq. mtrs and above with a minimum road width
of 12m.
18.3 When a basement floor is proposed for car parking. Convenient entry and exit shall be
provided to the basement. Adequate drainage, ventilation and lighting arrangements shall
be made to the satisfaction of the Authority.
18.4 If the plinth of the ground floor of the building is constructed leaving more set back than
the minimum prescribed, the basement floor may extend beyond this plinth; but no part of
the basement shall extend beyond the minimum set backs prescribed to the building
within the plot.
18.5 Basement floor is not permissible on sites where the setbacks prescribed in Table 4 are
less than 2 metres. In such cases, basement floor may be permitted if setbacks are
increased to at least 2 metres.
18.6 Access to the basement shall floor used other than for parking purposes be from inside
the building.
18.7 i) Every basement storey shall be atleast 2.4 mtr. in height from the floor to the bottom of
the roof slab/ beam / ceiling (whichever is less) and this height of B.F shall not exceed
2.75 metres. In case of high rise buildings/Three Star/ Five Star Hotel Complexes,
where extra height is necessary for the installation and running of machinery, or for the
purpose of double storeyed car parking where mechanical lifts are used for parking at
least for one level, the basement floor may be lowered so as to increase the height
upto 3.6 mtrs. This increase in height shall be limited to the area actually required for
the machinery or for car parking. Clearance from the Fire Force Department shall be
furnished by the applicant for permitting such increase in height.
ii) Adequate ventilation shall be provided for the basement storey. The standard of
ventilation shall be the same as required by the particular occupancy according to
these bye-laws. Any deficiency may be met by providing adequate mechanical
ventilation in the form of blowers, exhaust fans, air-conditioning plants, etc.,
iii) The basement storey should not project more than 1.00 mt. above the average Ground
level.
iv) Adequate arrangements shall be made to ensure that surface drainage does not enter
into a basement storey
37
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
18.8 The basement floor shall not normally be partitioned. If the ventilation standards as laid
down in sub-clause (ii) of bye-law 18.7 are met with, the partition of basement may be
permitted.
18.9 Adequate protection against fire shall be provided to the basement storey. The roof
separating the basement and the floor above shall be constructed of materials like RCC
or such other material which can provide resistance against fire for atleast two hours.
Where a basement floor is permitted in apartment houses (residential flat) and hotels, the
owner shall display the basement plan at the entrance. Thimbles (metal rings to receive
wires/ropes) shall be provided in the roof of the basement and their positions clearly
indicated on the plan. One fire extinguisher for every 100 sqm. of basement area or part
thereof, shall be provided.
18.10 The walls and the floors of the basement shall be watertight and shall be so designed
that the hydraulic pressure of the sub-soil water level is fully arrested.
18.11 Necessary arrangements shall be made to prevent moisture on walls.
18.12 No place in a basement floor shall be more than 11.25 Mtrs away from the exit in case of
residential / educational / institutional / hazardous buildings, 15 mtrs for commercial
buildings and 22.5 mtrs for industrial buildings.
18.13 One additional basement for all buildings exceeding five floors may be permitted for
parking and machines used for services and utilities of the buildings. The maximum
number of basements in such buildings shall be two.
18.14 Two additional basements in case of three star and above hotels may be permitted for
parking and machines used for service and utilities of buildings. The maximum number
of basements in such buildings shall be three.
19.0 Plinth.
19.1 The height of the plinth at the ground floor level shall not be less than 0.45 m. The
basement height should not project more than one metre above the average Ground
Level. In case of sloping street reference shall be made with respect to the street level at
the centre of the frontage of the plot. Where the level of the plot is different from the
street level, the plinth height shall be determined by the Authority with respect to the
surrounding average ground level so that adequate drainage from the site is assured.
19.2 In case of plots situated in low lying areas, the plinth level shall be such that sufficient
gradient is created for sewerage, and to avoid any risk of surface drains flooding the
building.
19.3 In case of access steps to the plinth, the construction shall be within the plot boundaries.
In special cases, where the general level of the site is higher than the street level, the
Authority shall have the power to impose conditions on the building schemes prescribing
the location of the building and of any steps or ramps leading from the streets to the
proposed building within the plot only. Such access ways shall be kept completely free of
obstructions and open to the sky.
20.0 Requirement of parts of building.
20.1 Habitable rooms – (1) No habitable room shall have a floor area of less than 8.0 sqm.
for plot sizes upto 120 sqm with a minimum width of 2.4 m.
(2) The minimum height of all rooms used for human habitation shall be 2.75 m
measured from the surface of the floor to the lowest point of the ceiling (bottom slab).
In case of air conditioned rooms, the height of not less than 2.4 m. measured from
the surface of the floor to the lowest point of the air conditioning duct or false ceiling
38
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
shall be provided. Where beams are provided the minimum head room shall be 2.4
m.
20.2 Kitchen – (1) The area of the kitchen where a separate dining area is provided shall not
be less than 5 sqm. with a minimum width of 1.8 m. Where there is a separate stores, the
size of the kitchen may be reduced to 4.5 sqm. A kitchen which is also intended for
dining shall have a floor area of not less than 7.5 sqm. with a minimum width of 2.1 m.
(2) The height of the kitchen shall not be less than 2.75 m. Where beams are provided the
minimum head room shall be 2.4 m.
(3) Every room to be used as a kitchen shall have the following conveniences, namely:-
a) unless separately provided with a pantry, provision should be made for
washing of kitchen utensils with proper drainage.
b) an impermeable floor.
c) proper chimney and flue to be provided for the escape of gases.
20.3 Bath room and water closets – (1) The size of a bath room shall not be less than 1.8
sqm. with a minimum width of 1.2 m. If it is a combined bath and water closet, its floor
area shall not be less than 2.0 sqm, with a minimum width of 1.2 m. The minimum floor
area for water closets shall be 1.1 sqm. with a minimum width of 0.9 mtrs.
(2) The height of a bath room or water closet measured from the surface of the floor to the
lowest point of ceiling shall not be less than 2.2 m.
3) Every room used as bath room and water closet,-
a) shall be so situated that atleast one of its walls shall have external wall opening (see bye-
law 20.11.3.b).
b) shall have the platform or seat made of water-tight non-absorbent materials.
c) shall be enclosed by walls or partitions and the surface of every such wall or partition
shall be furnished with a smooth impervious material to a height of not less than 1 m.
above the floor of such a room.
d) i) shall be provided with an impervious floor covering, sloping towards the drain with a
suitable grade and not towards verandah or any other room.
ii) shall not be used for any purpose except as a lavatory and no such room shall open
directly into a kitchen or cooking space by a door, window or other openings. Every
room containing water closets shall have a door completely closing the entrance to it.
e) shall have flush-out facility.
20.4 Mezzanine floor – (1) Not more than one mezzanine floor shall be permissible in a
building.
(2) A Mezzanine floor shall be accessible only from its lower floor.
(3) Minimum size of mezzanine floor if it is used as a living room shall be 9.5 sqm. The
aggregate area of a mezzanine floor shall not exceed 1/3 (or 33.33%) of covered area of
its lower floor.
(4) The minimum height of mezzanine floor shall be 2.2 m.
(5) A Mezzanine floor may be permitted over a room or a compartment
(6) It shall conform to the standards of the habitable room as regards lighting and ventilation:
39
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
(7) It shall be constructed without interfering with the ventilation of the space over and under
it;
(8) A mezzanine floor shall not be sub-divided into smaller compartments unless adequate
ventilation is provided;
(9) A mezzanine floor or any part of it shall not be used as a kitchen;
(10) In no case, a mezzanine floor shall be closed so as to make it liable to be converted into
unventilated compartments.
20.5 Loft – (1) A Loft provided in a kitchen shall not exceed 25% of the area of the kitchen and
when provided over a bath room, water closet and corridor, the loft can occupy up to
100% of the area.
(2) The head room for the loft shall be not more than 1.5 m.
20.6 Stair-case (1) The Minimum clear width, minimum tread and maximum riser of stair-
cases for buildings shall be as given below:
The Minimum width of stair cases shall be as follows,
a) Residential buildings (dwellings) 1.0 mtr.
Note: For row housing with two storeys, the minimum width shall be 0.75 mtr.
b) Residential hostel buildings 1.5 mtr.
c) Assembly building like auditoria, theatres and cinemas 1.5 mtr.
d) Educational building upto 24 mtrs in height 1.5 mtr.
e) Educational building more than 24 mtr. in height 2.0 mtr.
f) Institutional buildings upto 10 beds 1.5 mtr.
g) Institutional buildings more than 10 beds 2.0 mtr.
h) All other buildings 1.5 mtr.
The minimum width of tread without nosing shall be 25 cm. for residential buildings. The
minimum width of tread for other buildings shall be 30 cm.
Maximum riser shall be 19 cm. for residential buildings and 15 cm. for other buildings and
they shall be limited to 15 per flight.
(2) The minimum clear head room in a stair case shall be 2.2 mtr.
20.7 Lifts - Provision of lifts shall be made for all buildings with a height of 15 mtrs. and above
and or having more than ground plus three floors in accordance with Part VIII, section 5
of the National Building Code with regard to planning and designing of lifts. Lifts shall be
terminated at the topmost floor.
20.8 Boundary wall- a) Except with the special permission of the Authority,
(i) the maximum height of the front and side boundary wall shall be 1.5 mts. above the
ground level;
(ii) The rear boundary walls shall not have a height of more than 2 mts. above the centre
line of the service road or where there is no service road 2 mts. above the ground level;
(iii) In case of corner plots, the height of the boundary wall shall be restricted to 0.75 m. for a
length of 5 m from the intersection on either side. The corners of the boundary wall in
such cases shall be rounded off or cut off as indicated in the bye-law 17.0;
b) The stipulations of clause (a) of the bye-law of 20.6, are not applicable to the boundary
walls of jails, sanatoria and heavy industries and women’s hostels;
40
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
c) The boundaries of the building sites shall not be provided with barbed wire fence, prickly
hedge or other objectionable plants.
20.9 Industrial buildings - The minimum height of rooms shall be as provided in the Factory
Act, 1948 and rules made thereunder.
20.10 Disposal of polluted and unpolluted water - a) Separate drains shall be provided for
the disposal of polluted and unpolluted water seperately from the buildings. Polluted
water shall be the water coming out from lavatories, bathrooms, water closets, kitchen
and from other parts of the building which is already used for domestic or other purposes.
Unpolluted water shall include rain water and the unpolluted subsoil water, if any.
b) Roof of every building shall be constructed so as to permit effectual drainage of rain
water therefrom by means of sufficient rain water pipes of adequate size wherever
required, which shall be so arranged, jointed and fixed as to ensure that the rain water is
carried away from the building without causing dampness in any part of the wall or
foundation of the building or those of an adjacent building or causing annoyance or
inconvenience to the neighbour or passer-by.
c) Subject to bye-law 32.0, rain water pipe shall be connected to the roadside drain or may
be carried out in any other approved manner without causing damage to the property of
the Corporation.
d) Subject to bye-law 32.0, rain water pipe shall be affixed to the out-side of the external
walls of the building or in recesses or chases cut or formed in such external walls or in
such other manner as may be approved by the Authority.
20.11 Lighting and ventilation requirements.
20.11(1) Natural ventilation: Rooms shall have, for admission of light and air, one or more
openings, such as windows and ventilators, opening directly to the external air or into
an open verandah. Doors are not counted towards the area of openings in walls for
lighting and ventilation purposes.
20.11(2) Artificial ventilation: Where the light and ventilation requirements are not met through
daylight and natural ventilation, the same shall be ensured through artificial lighting
and mechanical ventilation, as per Part VIII Building Service section I, Lighting and
ventilation of National Building Code of India brought out by the Indian Standards
Institution. The provisions contained in the latest version of the Code shall be made
use of at the time of enforcement of the bye-laws.
20.11(3) Area of openings: a) Minimum aggregate area of openings excluding doors, shall not
be less than 1/6th of the floor area in the case of residential buildings. In the case of
other public buildings like business houses, educational buildings, offices,
institutional and hospital buildings, the minimum aggregate area of openings shall be
not less than 1/5th of the floor area. The area of openings shall be increased by 25%
in the case of kitchen. No portion of a room shall be assumed to be lighted if it is
more than 7.5 m from the opening.
b) In case of bath rooms and water closets, minimum area of window or ventilator shall
be 0.9 sq. mtrs. with one side being not less than 0.3 mtrs.
20.11(4) Ventilation shaft - For lighting and ventilating the space in water closets and bath
rooms, when no opening is provided towards any open spaces, they shall open on to
the ventilating shaft, the size of which shall not be less than as indicated below:
41
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
Size of ventilation shaft in
No. of storeys Minimum width in mts.
sqm.
Upto 2 1.2 0.9
Upto 4 1.8 1.2
Upto 6 4.0 1.5
Upto 8 5.4 1.8
Upto 10 8.0 2.4
11 and above 9.0 3.0
21.0 Exit requirements for high rise buildings, public and industrial buildings
21.1 General
21.1.1 Every building meant for human occupancy shall be provided with exits sufficient to
permit safe escape of occupants, in case of fire or other emergency.
21.1.2 In every building for multi family dwellings and all places of assembly, exits shall
comply with the minimum requirements of these bye-laws.
21.1.3 All exits shall be free of obstructions.
21.1.4 No building shall be altered so as to reduce the number, and size of exits to less than
that required.
21.1.5 Exits shall be clearly visible Routes to reach the exits shall be clearly marked and
signs posted so as to guide the persons using each floor.
21.1.6 Wherever necessary, adequate and continuous illumination shall be provided for
exits.
21.1.7 Fire fighting equipment shall be suitably located and clearly marked.
21.1.8 Alarm devices shall be installed to ensure prompt evacuation of the persons
concerned.
21.1.9 All exits shall provide continuous means of egress to the exterior of buildings or to the
exterior open space leading to a street.
21.1.10 Exits shall be so arranged that they may be reached without passing through another
occupied unit.
21.2 Arrangement of exits – Exits shall be so located that the travel distance on the floor
shall not exceed the limits given in Table 14.
21.3 Capacity of exits
i) The unit of exit width used to measure capacity of any exist shall be 50 cm. A clear
width of 25 cm. shall be counted as an additional half unit. Clear width less than 25 cm
shall not be counted for exit width;
ii) The occupants per unit exit width shall be as given in Table 15.
42
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
21.4 Occupant load – The occupant load of buildings shall be worked out as given in Table
16.
21.5 Number of exits - i) The location, width and number of exits shall be in accordance
with the travel distance, capacity of exits and the population of building based on
occupant load;
ii) There shall not be less than 2 exits serving every floor for buildings of
15 mtrs height and above and at least one of them shall be an internal
stairway.
TABLE 14
(Bye-law 21.2)
TRAVEL DISTANCE FOR OCCUPANTS
Sl. No. Group of occupancy Maximum travel distance in mtrs.
1 Residential 22.5
2 Educational 22.5
3 Institutional 22.5
4 Assembly 30.0
5 Business 45.0
6 Commercial 30.0
7 Industrial 30.0
8 Storage 30.0
9 Hazardous 22.5
Note: (1) The travel distance to any exit from the dead end of a corridor shall not exceed half
the distance specified above except in educational, assembly and institutional
occupancies in which case it shall not exceed 6 m.
(2) Whenever more than one exit is required for any room, space or floor of a building,
exits shall be placed as remote from each other as possible and shall be arranged so
as to provide direct access to the exits from different directions.
TABLE 15
(Bye-law 21.3)
OCCUPANTS PER UNIT EXIT WIDTH – MAXIMUM NUMBER OF OCCUPANTS
Sl.No. Group of occupancy Stairways Ramps Doors
1 Residential 25 50 75
2 Educational 25 50 75
3 Institutional 25 50 75
4 Assembly 40 50 60
5 Business 50 60 75
6 Commercial 50 60 75
7 Industrial 50 60 75
8 Storage 50 - 75
9 Hazardous 25 30 40
Note: Horizontal allowance: When horizontal exit is provided in buildings of mercantile, storage,
industrial, business and assembly occupancies, the capacity per storey per unit width of
exit stairways in the table above, may be increased by 50 % and in the buildings of
industrial occupancy, it may be increased by 100%.
43
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
TABLE 16
(Bye-law 21.4)
OCCUPANT LOAD
Sl. No. Group of Occupancy Occupant load-gross floor
area in sq. mtrs per person
1 Residential 12.5
2 Educational 4.0
3 Institutional 15.0*
4 Assembly
a) With fixed or loose seats
and dance floors 0.6**
b) Without seating facilities
including dining rooms 1.5**
5 Business and industrial 10.0
6 Storage 30.0
7 Hazardous 10.0
* The gross area shall mean plinth area or covered area. Occupant load in dormitory portions
or homes for the aged, orphanages, asylums, etc., where sleeping accommodation is
provided, shall be calculated at not less than 7.5 sqm. gross floor area per person.
** The gross floor area shall include, in addition, the main assembly room or space, any
occupied connecting room or space in the same storey or in the storeys above or below
where entrance is common to such rooms and spaces and they are available for use by the
occupants or the assembly place. No deduction shall be made in the gross floor area for
corridors, closets or other sub-divisions. The areas shall include all space serving the
particular assembly occupancy.
Note: The occupant load of a mezzanine floor discharging to a floor below shall be added to that
floor occupancy and the capacity of the exits shall be designed for the total occupancy
load thus established.
21.6 Doorways - a) Every exit doorway shall open into an enclosed stairway, a horizontal exit,
or a corridor or passageway providing continuous and protected means of egress;
b) No exit doorway shall be less than 75 cm in width in the case of residential buildings
and 100 cm in the case of other buildings. Doorways shall be not less than 200
cm. in height.
c) Exit doorways shall open outwards i.e., away from the room. But shall not obstruct
the travel along any exit. No door, when open, shall reduce the required width of
stairway or landing to less than 90 cm. Overhead or sliding doors shall not be
installed;
d) Exit doors shall not open immediately upon a flight of stairs; a landing equal to
atleast the width of the door shall be provided in the stairway at each doorway;
level of landing shall be same as that of the floor which it serves.
21.7 Revolving doors - a) Revolving doors shall not be used as required exits except in
residential, business and commercial occupancies, but shall not constitute more
than 1/2 the total required door width;
b) When revolving doors are considered as required exitway, the following
assumptions shall be made.
44
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
(1) Each revolving door shall be counted as one half of the exit unit width.
(2) Revolving doors shall not be located at the foot of a stairway. Any stairway served
by a revolving door shall discharge through a lobby or foyer.
21.8) Staircase - a) Interior stairs shall be constructed of non-combustive materials;
b) Interior staircases of all buildings with the exception of residential buildings upto
GF+3 floors shall be constructed as self contained units with atleast one side
adjacent to an external wall. The staircase shall be completely enclosed in the
case of buildings of 15 meters height and above;
c) A staircase shall not be arranged around a lift shaft unless the latter is entirely
enclosed by a material of fire resistance rating;
d) Hollow combustible construction shall not be permitted;
e) The minimum width of an internal staircase shall be as per bye-law 20.6;
f) The minimum width of treads without nosing shall be as per bye-law 20.6;
g) The maximum riser shall be as per bye-law 20.6;
h) Handrails shall be provided with a minimum height pf 100 cm. for all buildings and
shall be firmly supported;
i) No windings should be provided in a public building except in the case of emergency
exits.
21.9 Fire escapes or external stairs - a) Fire escapes shall not be taken into account in
calculating the evacuation time of a building;
b) All fire escapes above ground level shall be directly connected to the ground and
shall not lead to the basement floor;
c) All entrances to a fire escape shall be separate and remote from the internal
staircase;
d) The route to fire escape shall be free of obstruction at all times except a door way
leading to the fire escape which shall have the required fire resistance;
e) Fire escapes shall be constructed of non-combustible materials;
f) Stairs of fire escapes shall have straight flights not less than 75 cm. wide, 20 cm.
tread and with risers not more than 19 cm. The number of risers shall be limited to
16 per flight;
g) Handrails shall be of a height of not less than 100 cm.
21.10 Spiral stairs (fire escape) – The use of spiral staircases shall be limited to low occupant
loads and to buildings of not more than 9 metres height, unless they are connected to
platforms such as balconies and terraces to provide for a pause during escape. A spiral
fire escape shall be not less than 150 cm in diameter and shall be designed to give
adequate headroom;
21.11 Ramps – Ramps with a slope of not more than 1:10 may be substituted and shall comply
with all the applicable requirements of required stairways regarding enclosures, capacity
45
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
and dimensions. Larger slopes shall be provided for special uses but in no case greater
than 1 in 10. For all slopes exceeding, 1:10 and wherever the use is such as to involve
danger of slipping, the ramp shall be surfaced with approved non-slipping materials;
21.12 Exit corridors and passage ways - Exit corridors and passage ways shall be of width of
not less than twice the aggregate required width of exit doorways leading from them in
the direction of travel to the exits. Where stairways discharge through corridors and
passage ways, the height of corridors and passage ways shall be not less than 2.4 mtrs.
46
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
PART IV
STRUCTURAL DESIGN AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS
22.0 STRUCTURAL DESIGN.
22.1 The loads and forces on buildings shall be in accordance with Part VI Structural Design
Section on loads in the National Building Code of India.
22.2 The structural design of foundations and elements of substructures and superstructures
of wood, masonry, reinforced or prestressed concrete shall be in accordance with Part VI
Structural Design, Section 1 - Loads, section 2 - Foundations, Sections 3 - Wood, Section
4 - Masonry, section 5 - Concrete, section 6 – Steel and section 7 – Prefabrication and
Systems Building, of the National Building Code of India.
23.0 FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
23.1 Buildings shall be planned, designed and constructed to ensure adequate fire safety to
the property and inhabitants and this shall be carried out, in accordance with Part IV
Fire Protection of the National Building Code of India. The fire fighting requirements,
arrangements and installations required in building shall also conform to the provisions
of Part IV Fire Protection of National Building Code of India.
23.1.1. For buildings with ground floor + four floors and above (or height of 15 mtrs and
above), clearance of the Director of Fire Services shall be obtained regarding the Fire
Protection Provision in building.
24.0 BUILDING SERVICES.
The planning, design and installation, of air-conditioning and heating installations of the
building shall be in accordance with Part VIII Building Services, section 2 – Electrical
Installations and section 3 - Air-conditioning and Heating of the National Building Code
of India.
24.1 PLUMBING SERVICES.
The planning, design and installation of water supply systems, drainage, sanitary
installations and gas supply installations in buildings, shall be in accordance with Part
IX Plumbing Services, section 1 – Water Supply, section 2 – Drainage and Sanitation
and section 3 – Gas supply of the National Building Code of India.
25.0 TELECOM SERVICES.
a) Every Residential / Commercial premises should provide an access path for leading
copper / optical fibre cable to the building from outside the compound to the building:
b) A single 32mm GI pipe buried at a minimum depth of 60 cms from the compound wall
to the access point inside the building. A hand hole of 0.60 x 0.60 x 0.60m at the
outside of the compound wall where the pipe has been terminated should be provided.
c) In case of multistoreyed residential / business premises, minimum 2 pipes, one of
32mm and 2nd one of 60mm dia should be laid at a minimum depth of 60 cms with
hand hole at the boundary of the compound towards the street / road.
d) The buildings should be completely pre wired within using concealed conduits for their
communication requirements.
e) In case of the Multi-storeyed building a separate room preferably 4.50 x 3.65m may be
provided in the basement for installation of telecom equipment. The room should have
47
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
proper ventilation and lighting. The internal wiring from all the apartments should be
brought to this room and terminated on a termination box.
f) A vertical chute may be provided for drawing telecom cables from the basement with
openings at every floor at a convenient place preferably near lift / stair case so that the
telecom cable can be drawn for each floor / each flat.
26.0 CONSTRUCTION PRACTICES AND SAFETY.
26.1 The various construction activities like; demolition, excavation, blasting, actual
construction from foundation level upto completion shall be in accordance with Part VII
Construction Practices and Safety of the National Building Code of India.
26.2 The safety measures to be adopted during the various construction operations,
including storage of materials on the construction site and Corporation / public land
shall be in accordance with Part VII Construction Practices and Safety of the National
Building Code of India.
27.0 BUILDING MATERIALS.
The requirement of building materials to be used in construction shall conform to Part V
Building Materials of the National Building Code of India.
28.0 ALTERNATE MATERIALS, METHODS OF DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
Methods:
28.1 The provisions of bye-laws 22, 24, 25 and 26 and other provisions of the bye-laws are
not intended to prevent use of any material or method of construction not specifically
prescribed in these bye-laws provided such a work has been approved by the
Authority.
28.2 The Authority may approve any such alternative, provided it is found that the proposed
alternative is satisfactory and conforms to the provisions of the relevant parts regarding
materials, design and construction, method of work offered for the purpose intended,
atleast equivalent to that prescribed in the bye-law in quality, strength, compatibility,
effectiveness, fire, water and sound resistance, durability and safety.
28.3 Tests – Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of
these bye-laws or evidence that any material or method of design or construction, does
not conform to the requirement of the bye-laws or in order to substantiate claim for
alternative materials, design or methods of construction, the Authority may require tests
sufficiently in advance as proof of compliance. These tests shall be made by an
approved agency at the expense of the owner. This clause does not apply to materials
with I.S.I. Certificate.
28.3.1 Test methods shall be as per the relevant I.S. Codes.
28.3.2 Copies of the results of all such tests shall be retained by the Authority for a period of
not less than 2 years after the acceptance of the alternative materials.
Note: All references of clauses of the National Building Code in these bye-laws is referred to
the publication of the National Building Code of India 1983. If these numbers are
changed in subsequent additions, corresponding numbers shall be substituted.
28.4. Provision of chutes: In all multistoreyed/highrise residential and commercial buildings,
refuse chutes shall be provided in each floor and in specific area within the
premises/compound of the building, for garbage collection. Such chutes shall be
located away from the staircase and lift and shall not be at the core of the building.
48
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
28.5. Provision of letter or mail box: In all multistoried/high-rise buildings, the letter/mail box
of appropriate dimensions shall be provided on the ground floor of residential and
commercial buildings to meet the requirement of postal authorities.
28.6 Facilities at the construction premises – Temporary lavatories shall be provided for the
use of workers within the construction premises where the floor area is more than 250
sqm.
29.0 Solar water heater requirements - Solar water heaters shall be provided as per Table
17 for different categories of buildings.
TABLE 17
(Bye-law 29.0)
SOLAR LIGHTING AND WATER HEATER REQUIREMENTS
Sl. 100 liters per day shall be provided
Type of use
No. for every unit
1 Restaurants serving food and drinks with 40 sq. m. of seating or serving area
seating / serving area of more than 100 sq.m
and above
2 Lodging establishments and Tourist Homes 3 rooms
3 Hostel and guest houses 6 beds / persons capacity
4 Industrial canteens 50 workers
5 Nursing homes and hospitals 4 beds
6 Kalyana Mandira, Community Hall and 30 sq.mtrs. of floor area
Convention hall (with dining hall and kitchen)
7 Recreational clubs 100 sq. mtrs of floor area
8 Residential buildings:
a) Single dwelling unit measuring 200 sq.m. of
floor area or site area of more than 400 sq.m.
whichever is more
b) 500 lpd for multi dwelling unit / apartments
for every 5 units and multiples thereof.
9 Solar photovoltaic lighting systems shall be
installed in multi unit residential buildings (with
more than five units) for lighting the set back
areas, drive ways, and internal corridors.
30.0 SAFETY MEASURES AGAINST EARTH QUAKE IN BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
Buildings with ground plus four floors and above or buildings with a height of 15 mtrs. and
above shall be designed and constructed adopting the norms prescribed in the National
Building Code and in the “Criteria for earthquake resistant design of structures” bearing
No. IS 1893-2002 published by the Bureau of Indian Standards, making the buildings
resistant to earthquake. The supervision certificate and the completion certificate of every
such building shall contain a certificate recorded by the Registered Engineer / Architect
that the norms of the National Building Code and I.S. 1893-2002 have been followed in
the design and construction of buildings for making the buildings resistant to earthquake.
49
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
31.0 FACILITIES FOR PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSONS
Public and semi public buildings having covered area of 300 sqm. and above shall be
designed and constructed to provide facilities to the physically handicapped persons as
prescribed in the Schedule XI of these bye-laws.
32.0 RAIN WATER HARVESTING.
(a) Every building with a plinth area of exceeding 100 sq mtrs and built on a site
measuring not less than 200 sq mtrs shall have one or more Rain Water Harvesting
structures having a minimum total capacity as detailed in Schedule XII.
Provided that the Authority may approve the Rain Water Harvesting structures of
specifications different from those in Schedules – XII, subject to the minimum
capacity of Rain Water Harvesting being ensured in each case.
(b) The owner of every building mentioned in the bye-law 32 (a) shall ensure that the
Rain Water Harvesting structure is maintained in good repair for storage of water for
non potable purposes or recharge of groundwater at all times.
(c) The Authority may impose a levy of not exceeding Rs. 1000/- per annum for every
100 sq. mtr of built up area for the failure of the owner of any building mentioned in
the bye-law 32(a) to provide or to maintain Rain Water Harvesting structures as
required under these byelaws.
50
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
PART V
MISCELLANEOUS
33.0 PROHIBITION OF CONSTRUCTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
33.1 Erection on drains - No building or part of a building shall be erected over drains, sewer
lines, water mains or underground electric mains or on any such other public property.
33.2 Projection of doors windows, etc.- (i) No one shall build any wall or erect any fence or
other obstruction or projection or make any encroachment in or over any public street,
foot path, drain or margin land.
(ii) No door, gate, bar, windows or projections shall be hung, or placed so as to open
outwards or project upon any street or public utility or into any public property.
34. REPEAL AND SAVINGS
On these bye-laws coming into force, “The City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Building
Bye-laws, 1983” (approved by the Govt. in their order no. HUD 19 LRB 80 dated 10th August
1983) shall stand repealed.
Provided such repeal shall not affect -
a) the previous operation of the said bye-laws or anything done or suffered thereunder;
or
b) any right, privilage, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the said
bye-laws; or
c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offense committed
against the said bye-laws; or
d) any investigation, legal proceedings or remedy in respect of any such right, privilage,
obligation, liability, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and any such investigation,
legal proceedings or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed as if, these bye-laws had not come into
operation.
Provided further that any certificate, permit or licence granted under the said bye-
laws shall continue to be in force accordingly, unless and until superseeded by
anything done or any action taken under these bye-laws.
51
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULES
52
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE I
(Bye-law 2.48)
Land use classification and uses (or occupancies) permitted.
1.1 Classification of land use zone:
a) Residential
b) Commercial (retail and wholesale business)
c) Industrial (light and service industries, medium industries and heavy industries)
d) Public and semi-public use
e) Parks, open spaces and playgrounds
f) Transport and communication
g) Utilities and Services
h) Agricultural zone
1.2 Uses of land that are permissible by the Corporation and the uses permissible under
special circumstances by the Bangalore Development Authority as the Planning Authority
for the Corporation Area in the different zones are given in 1.2.1 to 1.2.8.
1.2.1 Residential zone
(a) Uses that are permissible – Dwellings, hostels including working women’s and
gents hostels, Dharmashalas, places of public worship, schools offering general
education course up to secondary education, public libraries, Post and Telegraph
Offices, BESCOM counters, B.W.S.S.B. counters, clubs, semi-public recreational
uses, milk booths, neighborhood or convenience shops occupying a floor area not
exceeding 20.00 sq. mtrs., doctor’s consulting rooms, offices of advocates and other
professions in public interest not exceeding 20.00 sq. mtrs. of floor area in a building.
(b) Uses that are permissible under special circumstances - Municipal, statutory
authorities, State and Central Government offices, banks, public utility buildings,
colleges, cemeteries, golf clubs, tailoring, laundry, hospitals for human care except
those meant for mental treatment, nursing homes, philanthropic uses, fuel storage
depots, filling stations, huller and flour mills. Coffee grinding machines including
service industries, with a maximum power upto 5 HP for all the industries as per the
list given in Schedule I-A and 10 HP in case of huller and flour mills. The power
required for air conditioners, lifts and computers shall be excluded while calculating
the horse-power specified above.
1.2.2 Commercial (retail business) zone
1.2.2.1 Uses that are permissible – Offices, residential buildings, shops and service
establishments like; barber, tailor, laundry, dry cleaning shops, hotels, clubs,
newspaper or job printing, place of amusement or assembly, community halls,
convention centres, exhibitions, restaurants, advertising signs conforming to relevant
building bye-laws, public places of worship, schools, colleges and other institutions
libraries, municipal, State or Central Government offices, any retail business or
service industries listed in Schedule I-A (upto 10 HP in major business area and only
upto 5 HP in neighborhood shops, nursing homes and residential buildings), ware
53
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
houses, kalyana mantapas, banks, cinema theaters. power required for air
conditioners, lifts and computers shall be excluded from the HP specified.
1.2.2.2 Uses that are permissible under special circumstances – Automobile
workshops, garages, storages, service of industrial establishments employing not
more than 10 labourers and manufacturing units with not more than 20 HP in major
business area and in district shopping centre and uses permitted or permissible
under special circumstances in the residential zone except those specifically
prohibited therein.
1.2.3 Commercial (wholesale business) zone
1.2.3.1 Uses that are permissible - Same as in the case of retail business zone and
service industries with power upto 20 HP, except residential buildings.
1.2.3.2 Uses that are permissible under special circumstances– Same as in the case of
retail business zone with power upto 50 HP (except residence, and hospitals) storage
of inflammable materials, junk yards, truck terminals and truck parking.
1.2.4 Light Industrial zone
1.2.4.1 Uses that are permissible – Industries conforming to performance standards as
given in illustrative list as in Schedule I-B which would not cause excessive injurious
or obnoxious fumes, odour, dust, effluents or other objectionable conditions
employing not more than 50 workers, with or without power, aggregate installed
power not exceeding 25 HP, covered storage for industry. Public Utilities like:
sewage and garbage disposal plants and related buildings, parking, loading and
unloading requirements to be provided for all uses. Bus and truck terminals, petrol
filling stations, taxi and scooter stands, dwelling for one manager, watch and ward
staff area not exceeding 240 sq. mts. or 10% of the total area whichever is lower.
Canteen and recreation facilities, kalyana mantapa, offices, shops, clubs, job printing,
banks, restaurants, dispensary and automobile service stations.
1.2.4.2 Uses that are permissible under special circumstances - Junk yards, dairy and
poultry farms, ice and freezing plants with power not exceeding 50 HP and sports
and recreational uses.
1.2.5 Medium industrial zone
1.2.5.1 Uses that are permissible – All uses, all industries that are permitted in light
industrial zone employing not more than 500 workers with aggregate installed power
not exceeding 100 HP. Industries conforming to performance standards as given in
illustrative list in Schedule I-C. Warehousing and Storage, public utility buildings,
parking, loading and unloading requirements to be provided in all cases, managers
and watch and ward quarters only not exceeding 300 sq. mtrs. area or 5% of the total
area whichever is lower.
1.2.5.2 Uses that are permissible under special circumstances - All uses that are
permissible under special circumstances in light industrial zone and power upto 300
HP conforming to performance standard.
1.2.6 Heavy industrial zone
1.2.6.1 Uses that are permissible – All industries, all uses permitted in the light and
medium industry zone and employing more than 500 workers. Watch and ward,
managers quarters only not exceeding 600 sq. mts. or 5% of the total area whichever
is lower. The industry shall be classified as heavy, if the labour force and power
exceed the quantum prescribed for medium industry.
54
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
1.2.6.2 Uses that are permissible under special circumstances– All uses that are
permissible under special circumstances in light or medium industry zone, slaughter
houses, burial grounds, cemeteries, obnoxious and hazardous industries away from
predominant wind directions with necessary clearance from Pollution Control Board.
1.2.7 Public and semi-public use
1.2.7.1 Use that are permissible – Government Administrative Centres, district offices, law
courts, jails, police stations, institutional offices, educational, cultural and religious
institution including libraries, reading rooms and clubs, medical and health institutions,
cultural institutions like; Community halls, opera houses of non-commercial nature,
Convention centres, Exhibitions, utilities and services, water supply installation
including disposal works, electric power plants, high tension sub-stations, gas
installations and gas works, fire fighting stations, banking institutions, filling stations and
quarters for essential staff and all uses permitted in parks and play grounds.
Note: Restaurants, banks, canteens, staff quarters not exceeding 240 sqm. required for
proper maintenance and functioning of public and semi-public uses may be permitted,
which are run on non-commercial basis in their own premises as ancillary to the
respective institution.
1.2.7.2 Uses that are permissible under Special Circumstances– Government printing
press, parking lots, repair shops, stadium, cemeteries, recreational clubs, canteens,
libraries, aquaria, planetaria, horticultural nursery and swimming pools.
1.2.8 Parks & open space and Playgrounds (including Public Recreational area)
1.2.8.1 Uses that are permissible – Sports grounds, stadium, playgrounds, parks, swimming
pools, other recreational uses, cemeteries, garden land, crematoria.
1.2.8.2 Uses that are permissible under special circumstances– Open air theaters, indoor
recreational uses, dwelling for watch and ward, social clubs, canteens, libraries,
Government dispensaries, milk booths, HOPCOMS and public use ancillary to park and
open spaces, the area of such ancillary use not exceeding 5% of the total area.
1.2.9 Transport and Communication
1.2.9.1 Uses that are permissible – Railway yards, railway station, bus stand, bus shelters,
roads-transport depots and parking areas, Airport, Telegraph Offices, Telephone
Exchanges, T.V. Station, Micro Wave Stations, essential residential quarters for watch
and ward.
1.2.9.2 Uses that are permissible under special circumstances– Canteens, banking
counters, clubs, godowns, indoor recreational uses and other ancillary uses. The area
of such ancillary use not exceeding 5% of the total area.
1.2.10 Utilities and services
1.2.10.1 Uses that are permissible – Water supply installation, treatment plants, drainage and
sanitary installations including treatment plants, electric power plants, high tension and
low tension transmission lines, sub-station etc., gas installation, gas works, fire
stations, milk dairies and such other public utilities.
1.2.10.2 Uses that are permissible under special circumstances– Canteen, banking counter,
clubs, indoor recreational use and other ancillary uses, the area of such ancillary use
not exceeding 5% of the total area.
55
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
1.2.10 Agricultural zone
1.2.11.1 Uses that are permissible – Agriculture, horticulture, dairy and poultry farming, milk
chilling centres, farm houses and their accessory buildings and uses not exceeding 200
sq. mtrs. of plinth area within the plot area limitation of 1.20 hectare. Uses specifically
shown as stated in the land use plan like; urban village, brick kilns, quarrying and
removal of clay and stone upto 3.0 mtrs. depth, gardens, orchards, nurseries and other
stable crops, grazing pastures, forest lands, marshy land, barren land and water sheet,
highway amenities viz., Filling stations, weigh bridges and check posts.
1.2.11.2 Uses that are permissible under special circumstances– Places of worship, school,
hospitals, libraries, Sports Clubs, cultural buildings, exhibition centres, park and open
spaces, storage and sale of farm products where it is produced, the service and repairs
of farm machinery and agricultural supplies, residential developments within the area
reserved for natural expansion of villages and buildings in such areas should not
exceed two floors (Ground + one).
Note: Diesel generators equivalent to the quantity of power supplied by the BESCOM may be
permitted as substitute to power cut and power failures in any zone after obtaining
information on the quantity of power supplied to a premises and the capacity of
generators required from the BESCOM. However, in residential zone, installation of
diesel generators be discouraged and shall be given in exceptional cases after spot
verification and obtaining N.O.C. from the people living within a distances of 100 mtrs.
from the location point of the generators.
56
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE – 1-A
(Bye-law 13 read with paragraphs 1.2.1 and 1.2.2 of Schedule I)
Illustrative list of service industries permissible in residential zones
(as part of residential buildings)/retail business zones.
Sl. No. Description
1 Bread and Bakeries
2 Confectionery, candies and sweets
3 Biscuit making
4 Ice, ice-cream
5 Cold storage (small scale)
6 Aerated water and fruit beverages
7 Huller and floor mills
8 Automobile, scooter and cycle service and repair workshop
9 Furniture (wooden and steel)
10 Printing, book binding embossing etc.,
11 Laundry, dry cleaning and dyeing facilities
12 General jobbing and machine shops
13 Household utensil repairs, welding, soldering, patching and polishing
14 Photography, printing (including sign board printing)
15 Vulcanizing
16 Tailoring
17 Hand looms
18 Velvet embroidery shops
19 Art weavers and silk sarees, printing and binding works
20 Jewellary, gold ornaments and silver wares
21 Mirror and photo frames
22 Umbrella assembly
23 Bamboo and cane products
24 Sport goods and repair shops
25 Medical Instrument repair shops
26 Optical lens grinding, watch, pen repairs
27 Radio and T.V. repair shops
28 Electric lamp fittings
29 Shoe making and repairs
30 Audio/video libraries
31 STD/ISD counters
57
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE – 1-B
(Bye-law 13.0 read with paragraphs 1.2.4 of Schedule I)
Illustrative list of Industries permissible in light Industrial Zone.
Sl. No. Description
1 Bread and bakeries
2 Confectionery, candies and sweets
3 Ice, ice-cream
4 Cold storage (small scale)
5 Aerated water and fruit beverages
6 Flour mills and huller machines upto 25 HP
7 Tailoring and garment making
8 Hand-looms and power looms
9 Hats, caps, turban, including embroidery
10 Hosiery including knitted garments
11 Gold and silver thread
12 Shoe lace making
13 Toy making (earthen, paper, wooden, plastic, metal and tin)
14 Cotton and silk printing
15 Cotton and silk cordages, twine thread and threaded ball making
16 Velvet embroidered shoe
17 Webbing (narrow fabrics, embroidery lace manufacturing)
18 Ivory carving
19 Art wares and silk screen printing and batik works
20 Jewellary, gold ornaments and silver wares
21 Wood and stone carving
22 Electroplating, mica plating and engraving
23 Photography, printing (including sign boards and painting)
24 Mirrors and photo frames
25 Umbrella assembly
26 Bamboo and cane products
27 Sports goods
28 Cards board box and paper products including paper
29 Stationery items including educational and school drawing instruments
30 Furniture making (wooden and steel)
31 Musical instruments
32 Printing, book binding, embossing, photograph etc.,
33 Optical lens grinding, watch and pen repairs
34 Rubber stamps
35 Steel wire products
36 Sheet metal works
37 Metal polishing
38 Laboratory porcelain wares
58
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
39 Radio assembly and parts (small scale)
40 Electric lamp fitting, shades fixture etc.,
41 Automobiles scooters and cycle service and repair workshop
42 Laundry and dry cleaners
43 General/jobbing machine
44 Iron products (only when related to other industries using electricity)
45 Biscuit making
46 Brushes (household, sanitary and toilet)
47 Shoe making and repairing
48 Leather goods
49 Black smithy
50 Household utensil, repair, welding, soldering, packing and polishing
51 Vulcanizing and tyre retreading
52 Fruit canning and preservation
53 Cement products
54 Candles and wax products
55 Chalk, crayon artists colour
56 Tobacco products (cigarettes and beedies)
57 Cosmetics and hair oils
58 Cutlery
59 Cycle parts and accessories
60 Door and window fittings
61 Drugs and medicines
62 Lantern, torches and flash lights
63 Aluminum wires, cake and pastry moulds
64 Padlocks and pressed locks
65 Rope making
66 Mathematical instruments
67 Household kitchen appliances
68 Builders hardwares
69 Tin products
70 Optical frames
71 Button clips
72 Wax polishing
73 Upholstery springs and other springs
74 Precision instruments of all kinds
75 Safety pins
76 Screws, bolts, nuts, pulleys, chains, gears
77 Conduit pipes fabrication (not exceeding 2” diameter)
78 Buckets and metal containers, plastic jugs and fixtures, metal embossing
79 Oil stoves and pressure lamps
80 Paper Mill (small scale) hand made
81 Washing soaps
59
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
82 Hand tools
Note: Conditions to be fulfilled:
1. Only small scale industries employing not more than 100 workers with or without
power or with aggregate installed power not exceeding 25 HP are allowed.
2. Each industry to be permitted is subject to restrictions on its performance
characteristics viz., (a) noise, (b) vibration, (c) dust, (d) odour, (e) effluent, (f)
general nuisance.
SCHEDULE I-C
(Bye-law 13 read with Paragraph 1.2.5 of Schedule I)
Illustrative list of industries permissible in medium industrial zone.
1. Small domestic appliances and gadgets (room heaters) coolers, hot plates, iron
lamps etc.,
2. Manufacturing of trunks and metal boxes, suit cases, small containers.
3. Scientific, educational and industrial precision instruments.
4. Clocks and watches, photographic equipments.
5. Typewriters.
60
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE – II
(Bye-law 3.2)
Form of application for building licence
Form of application to erect, re-erect or to make alternations in any place in a building to
obtain building licence under section 299, 304 or 312 of the Karnataka Municipal Corporation
Act, 1976.
To
The Commissioner,
Bangalore Mahanagara Palike
Bangalore
Sir,
I hereby give notice that I intend to erect/re-erect/to make alterations in the building
bearing property No. ………., plot No…………, city survey No. …………, ward No………..,
locality / street…………. in accordance with the Building Bye-laws of Bangalore City bye-law 3,
I forward herewith the following plans and specifications in quadruplicate duly signed by me
…………………………………………………………(name in block letters)
The registered architect / engineer / licensed supervisor Sri/Smt.………… bearing the
registration No. ……….. will supervise the construction.
The following documents are enclosed herewith.
1. Title deed / possession certificate.
2. Receipt for having remitted the licence fee.
3. Site plan, showing the existing features like trees, well etc., (Block levels to be furnished
in cases where the gradient of the land exceeds 5% (1:20) or where basement / cellar
floors are proposed below ground level).
4. Latest khata certificate and assessment book (extract)
5. Upto date tax paid receipt (certified copies)
6. Property card and the sketch issued by the Department of Survey Settlement and Land
Records (city survey)
7. Previously sanctioned plan
8. Affidavit and Indemnity Bond as prescribed.
9. Foundation certificate.
61
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
10. No objection certificate from agencies like, BDA, BESCOM, BWSSB, KSCB, District
Magistrate, Director of Factories and Boilers, Controller of Explosives, Railways, Fire
Force Department, Airport Authority of India, Government Health Department and any
other authority wherever applicable.
11. Building plan of all the floors along with elevations, sections and specification of the work.
12. Schedule-II of National Building Organization (NBO).
13. Receipt for the payment of development charge .
14. Any other information.
I further give the following information:
a) The occupancy of building is intended to ……………………. use
b) The source of water for the construction is ……………………..
c) The duration of stocking of building materials is …………………….
I request that the plans submitted is approved and permission is accorded to execute the
work.
Signature of the owner ……………………………..
Name of the owner ……………………………..
(in block letters)
Address of owner ……………………………..
……………………………..
Date ……………… ……………………………..
62
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE – III
(Bye-law 3.2.11)
Form of Supervision
I hereby certify that the erection, re-erection material alternation in the building bearing
property No. ………., plot No…………, city survey No. …………, ward No……….., locality /
street…………. will be carried out under my supervision and I certify that all the materials (type
and grade) and the workmanship of the work will be in accordance with the general and detailed
specifications submitted along with this certificate and that the work will be carried out according
to the sanctioned plans.
I hereby undertake to report to the authority within 3 days of any deviation from the sanctioned
plan, or violation of Building Bye–laws / Zoning Regulations, observed during the construction of
the aforesaid building.
Applicable to high-rise buildings or the buildings specified in the bye-law 30.0. I also certify that
the building has been designed as per the specifications prescribed in the National Building Code
and publication of the Bureau of the Indian Standard 1893 - 2002 for making the building resistant
to earthquake.
Signature ……………………………………………………………………………….
Name of the registered Architect/Engineer/Supervisor.……………………..
(in block letters)
Registration Number of the registered Architect/Engineer/Supervisor
…………………………………………….………………………………………………
Address of the registered Architect/Engineer/Supervisor…………………..
…………………………………………………………………………………………….
Dated: …………….. …………………..
63
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE – IV
(Bye-law 3.6)
Registration of Architects/Engineers/Supervisors
Qualification for the registration of technical personnel for preparation of schemes for
building licence and supervision and procedure for registration: their duties and
responsibilities.
IV-1 General
The qualification of the technical personnel and their competence to carry out different
jobs of building licence and supervision shall be as given in IV-2 to IV-5.2.
IV-2 Architect
IV-2.1 Qualifications
The minimum qualification for an architect shall be the Associate Membership of the
Indian Institute of Architects or such degree or diploma which makes him eligible for such
membership or such qualifications as listed in the Architects Act, 1972 (Central Act 20 of
1972) and shall be registered with the Council of Architecture under the said Act.
IV-2.2 Competence
The registered architect will be entitled to submit:-
i) All plans and related information with necessary certificates connected with
building licence.
ii) Structural details and calculations of buildings on plots upto 500 sq.m and upto
three storey or 10.50 Metre in height.
iii) Service plan for all buildings
iv) Certificate for supervision and completion for all buildings.
IV-3 Engineer
IV-3.1 Qualifications
The minimum qualification for an engineer shall be Corporate Member of Civil
Engineering division of the Institution of Engineers (India) or such degree in civil,
municipal or structural engineering which makes him eligible for such membership or the
qualification recognized by the Karnataka Public Service Commission for recruitment to
the post of Assistant Engineer.
IV-3.2 Competence
The registered engineer will be entitled to submit:
i) All plans and related information with necessary certificates connected with
building licence.
ii) Structural details and calculations of buildings on plots upto 500 sq.m. and upto 4
storeys or 14 metre in height.
iii) Service plans for all buildings.
64
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
15 Certificate of supervision and completion for all buildings.
IV-4 Structural engineer
IV-4.1 Qualification
The minimum qualification for a structural engineer shall be Corporate Member of Civil
Engineering Division of the Institution of Engineers (India) or such degree in civil, or
structural engineering which makes him eligible for such membership or the qualification
recognized by the Karnataka Public Service Commission for the post of Assistant
Engineer with an experience of not less than three years in Structural Engineering with
designing and practice.
Note: The three years experience shall be relaxed to two years in the case of holder of post
graduate degree granted by a recognized university in the branch of Structural
Engineering. In the case of a Doctorate in Structural Engineering, the experience
required would be one year.
IV-4.2 Competence
The Registered Structural Engineer will be competent to submit:
i) All plans and related information with necessary certificates connected with building
licence.
ii) Structural details and calculations for all buildings.
iii) Service plans for all buildings.
iv) Certificate of supervision and completion for all buildings.
IV-5 Supervisor
IV-5.1 Qualifications
The minimum qualification for a Supervisor shall be a diploma in Civil Engineering or
Architecture or equivalent course recognized by the Karnataka Public Service
Commission with an experience of not less than three years in building design,
construction and supervision.
IV-5.2 Competence
The registered supervisor will be entitled to submit:
i) All plans and related information with necessary certificates connected with
building licence for buildings of sital area upto 200 sqm. and upto two storeys or
7.0 metres in height and
ii) Certificate of supervision for buildings mentioned in Paragraph (i) above.
IV-6 Registration fee
IV-6.1 Every application for registration shall be accompanied by a receipt for having
credited registration fee as specified below:
a) Supervisor: Rs. 1000 (Rs. One thousand only).
b) Engineer/Structural Engineer or Architect: Rs. 2000 (Rs. Two thousand only)
65
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
The above fee shall be valid for five years. The renewal fee shall be in
accordance with the above scale for every 5 years of renewal.
IV-7 Validity of registration
IV-7.1 The validity of every registration so granted for the above categories by the
Authority shall be for a period of five years and renewable thereafter for every five
years unless the same is cancelled by the Authority. The application for renewal
shall be made to the Authority one month before the date of expiry of the
registration. If any owner / builder contravenes the provisions of these bye-laws
and rules in force, the Authority shall inform the same to the registered Architect /
Engineer / Supervisor in the first instance, warn in the second instance and cancel
the registration if the same is repeated for the third time.
IV-8 Duties and responsibilities of technical personnel applicant or owner as the case
may be who undertake preparation of plans and designs and supervision of the
works:
a) They shall be conversant with the provisions of the Karnataka Municipal
Corporation Act, 1976, rules and bye-laws made thereunder as well as the
Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 and regulations made
thereunder. They shall prepare plans, sections, elevations and other structural
details as per the requirements of the clauses of the above to the prescribed
scales marking clearly all the dimensions along with furnishing the area tables,
drawings, specifications, etc.,
b) They shall prepare and submit all plans either new or revised with necessary
documents and other details in a neat, clean and legible manner without any
scratches, erosions or corrections.
c) They shall personally comply with all requirements received from the Corporation
in connection with the work under their charge promptly, expeditiously and in all
respects. When they do not agree with the requirements, they shall state their
objections to the Authority in writing for non-compliance of any requirements
within the stipulated time. Otherwise, their plans and applications shall be filed
forthwith by the Commissioner and shall not be re-opened.
d) They shall immediately intimate the owners the corrections, or other changes
made on the plans, documents and details as per requirements of the
Corporation.
e) They or their authorised agents or employees, shall not accept the employment
for preparation and submission of plans, with or without supervision, of any work if
the same is intended or proposed to be or being executed or already executed in
contravention of provisions of the Karnataka Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 and
the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961, rules, bye-laws and
regulations and other orders made thereunder.
f) They shall give all facilities to the Corporation’s staff to inspect and examine the
work in progress.
g) They shall report to the Authority of any work executed on site in contravention of
provisions of the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976, the Karnataka
Town and Country Planning Act, 1961, rules, bye-laws and regulations and other
orders made thereunder. They shall also report to the Authority of any work
executed in contravention of the sanctioned plan in the course of construction.
66
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
h) They shall regularly fill up the progress report form and shall not proceed with the
next stage of work without getting the previous stage inspected and examined by
the authorised corporation staff. They shall fully comply with the instructions
issued after examination of the work.
i) They shall not materially and structurally deviate from the sanctioned plan, without
previous approval of the Authority. They shall explain to the owners about the risk
involved in contravention of the provisions of the Act, rules, bye-laws, zoning
regulations, standing orders and policy orders of the Corporation.
j) They shall submit the completion certificate and the executed plan (in case of
deviations) immediately when the work is completed. They shall fully comply with
the requirements of the Corporation in connection with the Completion Certificate
within the stipulated time.
k) They shall be deemed to have continued their supervision unless they have given
in writing to the Corporation, that they have ceased as employees and further they
shall be held responsible for the work executed upto the date of intimation after
the Corporation having accepted their termination.
IV-9 Construction of high-rise buildings
Construction of high-rise buildings shall be undertaken by the builders by engaging
registered structural engineers.
67
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE – V-A
(Bye-law 4.1)
FORM OF SANCTION OF LICENCE
From
The Commissioner
Bangalore Mahanagara Palike
Bangalore
To
………………………….
………………………….
………………………….
Sir/Madam,
With reference to your application No …………… dated …………… for grant of licence for
the erection/reerection/making alteration / renewal of the building bearing property No. ……….,
plot No…………, City Survey No. …………, ward No……….., locality / street…………. I have to
inform you that sanction has been granted by the Authority subject to the following conditions:
1. A copy of the sanctioned plan should be displayed in the work spot.
2. A note book should be maintained in the workspot and should invariably be
produced to the inspecting officers of the Mahanagara Palike for recording
instructions.
3. The building shall not be occupied without obtaining occupancy certification after
completion of the building under section 310 of KMC Act, 1976.
4. Other conditions.
Signature of the Authority
68
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE – V-B
(Bye-law 4.1)
FORM OF REFUSAL OF LICENCE
From
The Commissioner
Bangalore Mahanagara Palike
Bangalore
To
………………………….
………………………….
………………………….
Sir/Madam,
With reference to your application No…………… dated …………… for grant of licence for
the erection/reerection/making alteration / renewal of the building bearing property No. ……….,
plot No…………, City Survey No. …………, ward No……….., locality / street…………. I have to
inform you that sanction has been refused by the Authority on the following grounds:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Signature of the Authority
69
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE – VI
(Bye-law 5.2)
FORM OF NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT OF WORK
I hereby certify that the erection/re-erection/material alteration of the building bearing
property No. ………. plot No…………, City Survey No. …………, ward No……….., locality /
street…………. under the supervision of …………………registered Architect/Engineer/
Supervisor bearing registration No…….. in accordance with plans sanctioned as per your
permission vide No……….. LP…………………. dated …………………… is to commence on
……………………
Signature of the owner ……………………………..
Name of the owner ……………………………..
(in block letters)
Address of owner ……………………………..
……………………………..
Dated ……………… ……………………………..
70
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE – VII
(Bye-law 5.3)
FORM OF COMMENCEMENT CERTIFICATE
To:
……………………………..
……………………………..
……………………………..
Sir,
Subject: Issue of permission for the commencement of work of the building sanctioned
in License No……………….. LP………………… Dated…………………
Ref: Your application dated ……………
The property No. …………… of Ward No. …………… was inspected on ……………and
the foundation marked / laid / columns marked / fixed is verified with reference to the building plan
sanctioned by the Bangalore Mahanagara Palike in LP No. …………… and found that the same
is as per the sanctioned plan and hence permission is hereby accorded to proceed with the work
subject to the following conditions:
1. The work should be carried out strictly as per the sanctioned plan and Building Bye-
Laws without any deviations, alterations or violations.
2. When the work has reached the completion of the foundation or footing or columns
fixed, the Corporation shall be intimated regarding the progress of work so as to
facilitate the Authority to inspect and verify as to whether the construction is being
carried out as per the sanctioned plan and Building Bye-Laws.
3. Other conditions.
Office Stamp........................................
Office Communication No....................
Dated:...........................
Signature of Authority...........................
Name, designation and Address of the
Authority...............................................
..............................................................
71
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE – VIII
(Bye-law 5.6.1)
FORM OF COMPLETION CERTIFICATE
I hereby certify that the erection/re-erection/material alteration of the building bearing
property No. ………., plot No…………, City Survey No. …………, ward No………., locality /
street…………. has been supervised by me and has been completed on ……………………..
according to the plans sanctioned vide LP No………….. dated …………….. The work has been
completed to my best satisfaction. The workmanship and all the materials (types and grade)
have been used strictly in accordance with the general and detailed specifications. No provisions
of the Building Bye-laws, sanctioned plan and conditions prescribed or orders issued thereunder
have been transgressed in the course of the work. The building is fit for use for which it has been
erected, re-erected, or altered with or without additions. I request that the occupancy certificate
for the premises may be issued.
Applicable to the high-rise buildings or the buildings specified in the bye-law No. 30.0 I also certify
that the building has been designed as per the specifications prescribed in the National Building
Code and the publication of the Bureau of Indian Standard 1893 - 2002 for making the building
resistant to earthquake.
Signature of registered Architect/
Engineer / Supervisor …………………….
Name of registered Architect/
Engineer / Supervisor …………………….
(in block letters)
Reg. No. of registered Architect/
Dated……………….. Engineer / Supervisor …………………….
72
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE – IX
(Bye-law 5.6.1)
FORM OF OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE
A plan was sanctioned for construction of …………………………. apartment building
consisting of …………………………………………………. at
………………………………………………………………………… Vide LP
No…………………………. /…………. Dt: - ………………..
On receipt of the intimation of the completion of the building from the Registered Architect
/Engineer / Supervisor, the building was inspected by the …………………………………….and it
was found that the applicant has built the building according to the sanctioned plan/effected
certain changes from the sanctioned plan. These changes were regularized by the Commissioner
in his note dated ……………………… as recommended by the ……………………………………..
by levying a penalty of Rs……………….…………….. after ensuring that the deviations are within
the permissible limit of 5% from the sanctioned plan.
The applicant has paid a sum of Rs………(Rupees……………………………) vide challan no
………dated…………….. towards the compounding fine. Hence, the deviations affected by the
applicant are regularized.
Therefore, permission is granted to occupy the building for ….……………. Purpose at
……………………………………………………….……………….. vide LP………………….
Consisting of …………………………………………. with the following details.
Floor Description Area No. of Units / Use of Remarks
the floor
And subject to the following conditions:
1. He shall not add or alter materially, the structure or a part of the structure there off without
specific permission of BMP. In the event of the applicant violating, the BMP has the right to
demolish the deviated/altered/added portion without any prior notice.
2. He shall construct the toilet facilities for the visitors, drivers and servants at Ground floor
Level within the plinth area of the building within 3 months from the date of issue of O.C.
3. The basement floor must be used for car parking purpose only as per sanctioned plan.
4. Other conditions.
On default of the above conditions, the O.C. issued will be with drawn.
Office Stamp……………………….. Signature of Authority …………………………………….
Office communication No…………. Name, designation and Address of the Authority …
Dated …………………….. ……………………………………………………………….
Commissioner
Bangalore Mahanagara Palike
Bangalore
73
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE – X
Building lines
(Note 4 below Table 6)
Building lines are prescribed for the following important roads in Bangalore. Wherever
village / gramatanas / built-up areas are facing the highways, 5 m of building line is prescribed.
Front setbacks are also prescribed separately for various types of buildings in Tables 4 and 5.
The maximum of the above have to be provided as setback / building line in the front.
Building lines for the following roads are as follows:
District No. of
Sl.
Name of the road Building line required the revised
No.
C.D.P.
1 Sampige Road 3 m from the edge of the road 1
2 Margosa Road 3 m from the edge of the road 1
3 17th cross, Malleshwaram 3 m from the edge of the road 1
4 Platform Road 3 m from the edge of the road 1
5 T.Chowdaiah Road 5 m from the edge of the road 2
6 Palace Cross Road 3 m from the edge of the road 1
7 K.B.G.Road 3 m from the edge of the road 1
8 80 Ft.Road, Rajajinagar 3 m from the edge of the road 2
9 West of Chord Road 3 m from the edge of the road 3
10 Magadi Road 5 m upto Housing Board Quarters road 3
11 Magadi Road 12 m beyond Housing Board Quarters road 3
12 Tumkur Road 5 m upto CMTI Quarters Road 4
13 Tumkur Road 12 m beyond CMTI Quarters Road 4
14 H.M.T Road 3 m beyond CMTI Quarters Road 5
15 Triveni Road, Yashwanthpur 12 m beyond CMTI Quarters Road
16 Bellary Road 5 m upto Mekri Circle from the edge of the
6
Road
17 Bellary Road 12 m beyond Mekri Circle from the edge of
6
the Road
18 Tannery Road 3 m upto Devarajeevanahalli cross 6
19 Tannery Road 5 m beyond Devarajeevanahalli cross 6
20 Old Madras Road 5 m upto level crossing beyond
Devarajeevanahalli cross (new Aero Engine 8
Factory)
21 Old Madras Road 12 m beyond level crossing beyond
Devarajeevanahalli cross (new Aero Engine 8
Factory)
22 Kengal Hanumanthaiah Road 3 m from the edge of the road 9
23 Jayachamarajendra Road 3 m from the edge of the road 9
24 Lalbagh Fort Road 3 m from the edge of the road 9
25 H.Siddaiah Road 3 m from the edge of the road 9
26 Rajaram Mohan Roy Road 3 m from the edge of the road 9
27 Varthur Road 3 m from the edge of the road between 9A
74
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
District No. of
Sl.
Name of the road Building line required the revised
No.
C.D.P.
Trinity Church to Airport
28 Varthur Road 12 m beyond Airport 9A
29 Chinmaya mission Hospital Road 3 m Adarsha Theatre to Police Station 9A
30 Indiranagar 100’ Road 3 m from the edge of the road 9A
31 Mahatma Gandhi Road 5 m upto Dickinson road 10
32 Mahatma Gandhi Road 5 m Dickinson road to Trinity Church 10
33 Central Street 3 m from the edge of the road 10
34 Infantry Road 3 m from the edge of the road 10
35 Chandni Chowk 2 m from the edge of the road 10
36 Dispensary Road 3 m from the edge of the road 10
37 Commercial street 2 m from the edge of the road 10
38 Dickinson Road 3 m from the edge of the road 10
39 Kensington Road 3 m from the edge of the road 10
40 Cavalry Road (Kamaraj Road) 3 m from the edge of the road 10
41 St. Johns Road 5 m from the edge of the road 10
42 St. Johns Road 5 m from the edge of the road 10
43 Assaye Road 3 m from the edge of the road 10
44 Wheeler Road 3 m from the edge of the road 10
45 Brigade Road 3 m from the edge of the road 10
46 St. Marks Road 3 m from the edge of the road 10
47 Residency Road 5 m from the edge of the road 10
48 Richmond Road 5 m from the edge of the road 10
49 Cambridge Road 2m from the edge of the road 10
50 Murphy Road 3 m from the edge of the road 10
51 Vidhana Veedhi 9 m from the edge of the road 10
52 Palace Road 6 m from the edge of the road 10
53 Miller Road 5 m from the edge of the road 10
54 Queen’s Road 3 m from the edge of the road 10
55 Jayamahal main Road 3 m from the edge of the road 10
56 Nandidurg Road 3 m from the edge of the road 10
57 Cunningham Road 3 m from the edge of the road 10
58 Race Course Road 6 m from the edge of the road 10
59 Kempegowda Road 5 m from the edge of the road 11
60 District Office Road 5 m from the edge of the road 11
61 Avenue Road 2 m from the edge of the road 11
62 Chickpet Road 2 m from the edge of the road 11
63 Akkipet Road 2 m from the edge of the road 11
64 Cottonpet Main Road 3 m from the edge of the road 11
65 Nagarathpet Main Road 2 m from the edge of the road 11
66 East Tank Bund Road (Subashnagar) 3 m from the edge of the road 11
75
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
District No. of
Sl.
Name of the road Building line required the revised
No.
C.D.P.
67 Goodshed Road 3 m from the edge of the road 11
68 Balepet Road 2 m from the edge of the road 11
69 BVK Iyengar Road 3 m from the edge of the road 11
70 Arcot Srinivasachar Street 3 m from the edge of the road 11
71 Seshadri Road 3 m from the edge of the road 11
72 Subedar Chatram Road 3 m from the edge of the road 11
73 5th Main Road (Gandhinagar) 3 m from the edge of the road 11
74 1st Main Road (Gandhinagar) 3 m from the edge of the road 11
75 3rd Cross Road (Chamarajpet) 3 m from the edge of the road 11
76 Narsimharaja Road 3 m from the edge of the road 11
77 Silver Jubilee Park Road 3 m from the edge of the road 11
78 Kalasipalyam Main Road 3 m from the edge of the road 11
79 Pampamahakavi Road 3 m from the edge of the road 12
80 Kanakapura Road 5 m upto Ring road 13
81 Kanakapura Road 12 m beyond Ring road 12 &14
82 Hosur Road 5 m upto Outer Ring Road near Central Silk
14A
Board
83 Hosur Road 12 m beyond outer ring road 13
84 Roads alround Jayanagar Shopping
3 m from the edge of the road 14
Complex
85 Southend Road 5 m from the edge of the road 14
86 East end Road 5 m from the edge of the road 14
87 Patallamma Street 2m from the edge of the road 14
88 Bannerghatta Road 5 m up to Drive in theatre 14
89 Bannerghatta Road 12 m beyond Drive in theatre 14
90 Krumbigal Road 3 m from the edge of the road 14
91 Ashoka Pillar Road (100’ Road) 6 m from the edge of the road 14
92 Alur Venkatarao Road 3 m from the edge of the road 15
93 K.R.Road 3 m from the edge of the road 15
94 Bull Temple Road 3 m from the edge of the road 15
95 Gandhi Bazaar Main Road 3 m from the edge of the road 15
96 Nagasandra Road 3 m from the edge of the road 15
97 B.P.Wadia Road 3 m from the edge of the road 15
98 Vani Vilas Road 3 m from the edge of the road 15
99 Vasavi Temple Road 3 m from the edge of the road 15
100 Diagonal Road, VV Puram 3 m from the edge of the road 15
101 Mysore Road 5 m up to REMCO from the edge of the road 16
102 Mysore Road 12 m from the edge of the road beyond
16
REMCO
103 Hennur Road 3 m upto Salem Railway line level crossing 16
104 Hennur Road 8 m beyond Salem Railway line level -
76
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
District No. of
Sl.
Name of the road Building line required the revised
No.
C.D.P.
crossing
105 Banasawadi Road 3 m upto Salem Railway line level crossing 16
106 Banasawadi Road 8 m beyond Salem Railway line level
16
crossing
107 Munireddy Palyam Main Road 2 m from the edge of the road 6
108 Poorna Venkatarao Road 2 m from the edge of the road 11
109 Police Road and Belimutt Road 2 m from the edge of the road 11
110 Kilari Road 2 m from the edge of the road 11
111 Seppings Road 2 m from the edge of the road 11
112 New Market Road 2 m from the edge of the road 10
113 Jewellers Street 2 m from the edge of the road 10
114 Dharmaraja Koil Street 2 m from the edge of the road 10
115 Jumma Masjid Road, OPH Road 2 m from the edge of the road 10
116 Narayanapillai Street 2 m from the edge of the road 10
117 Ibrahim Saheb Street 2 m from the edge of the road 10
118 Thoppa Mudaliar Road 2 m from the edge of the road 10
119 Thimmaiah Road 2 m from the edge of the road 10
120 Linden Street 2 m from the edge of the road 9A
121 Austin Town Centre Street 2 m from the edge of the road 9A
122 KHN Bhadur Abdul Rehman Rd 2 m from the edge of the road 9A
123 Seshadripuram I Main Road 3 m from the edge of the road 1
124 50’ Road Hanumanthanagar 3 m from the edge of the road 15
125 4th Cross Road, Hanumanthanagar 2 m from the edge of the road 15
126 Thavarekere Main Road (from Hosur
2 m from the edge of the road 13
Road junction to circle of old village)
127 Gavipuram Guttahalli Main Rd 2 m from the edge of the road 15
128 Nethaji Road 2 m from the edge of the road 6
129 Malleswaram 8th Main (from 6th cross
3 m from the edge of the road 1
junction to 15th cross junction)
130 Dattatreya Temple street 2 m from the edge of the road 1
131 West of Chord Road from Navrang
3 m from the edge of the road 4
Circle to LIC colony
132 Rajajinagar Bashyam Circleto ESI
3 m from the edge of the road 2
Hospital
133 Madhavarao Mudaliar Road 3 m from the edge of the road 10
134 Davis Road 2 m from the edge of the road 10
135 Robertson Road 2 m from the edge of the road 10
77
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE XI
(Bye-law 31)
Facilities for physically handicapped persons
1. These bye-laws shall apply to the Physically handicapped persons having the following
disabilities.
a) Non-ambulatory disabilities: impairments that, regardless of cause or manifestation, for all
practical purposes, confine individuals to wheelchairs.
b) Semi-ambulatory disabilities: Impairments that cause individuals to walk with difficulty or
insecurity. Individuals using braces or crutches, amputees, arthritics, spastics, and those
with pulmonary and cardiac ills may be semi-ambulatory.
c) Hearing disabilities: Deafness or hearing handicaps that make an individual insecure in
public areas because he is unable to communicate or hear warning signals.
d) Sight disabilities: Total blindness or impairments affecting sight to the extent that the
individual functioning in public areas is insecure or exposed to danger.
2. Access path/walk way: The width of access path/walk way from plot entry and surface
parking to the building entry shall not be less than 1.80 m. It shall not have a gradient
exceeding 5%.
3. Surface parking: Atleast two car spaces shall be provided at surface level near entrance
with maximum travel distance of 30.00 metres from the building entrance.
4. Space for wheel chair users: Adequate space shall be kept for the free movement of wheel
chairs. The standard size of wheel chairs shall be taken as 1050 mm x 750 mm. The
doors shall have a minimum width of 900 mm, to facilitate the free movement of wheel
chairs.
5. Approach to plinth level : Atleast one entrance shall have approach through a ramp. The
ramp shall have a minimum width of 1.80 metre with maximum gradient of 1:10.
6. Entrance landing: Entrance landing shall be provided adjacent to ramp with the minimum
dimension of 1.80 m x 2.00 m.
7. Corridors: The minimum width of corridors shall be 1.80 m.
8. Staircases: The minimum width of staircases shall be 1.50 metres. The minimum number
of risers on a flight shall be limited to 12. Size of treads shall not be less than 30 cm and
the height of risers shall not be more than 15 cm.
9. Lifts: a) Wherever lifts are required to be installed as per bye-laws, provision of atleast one
lift shall be made for the wheel chair users with the following cage dimensions
recommended for passenger lifts of 13 persons capacity by Bureau of Indian Standards.
Clear internal depth 1100 mm (1.10 m)
Clear internal width 2000 mm (2.00 m)
Entrance door width 900 mm (0.90 m)
b) The lift lobby shall have a minimum inside measurement of 1.80m x 1.80m.
10. Toilets: One special water closet in a set of toilets shall be provided for the use of
handicapped persons with wash basin keeping in view the following provisions.
a) The minimum size of toilet shall be 1.50 m x 1.75 m.
b) The maximum height of the W.C. seat shall be 0.50 m above the floor.
78
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
11. Hand rails: Hand rails shall be provided for ramps, staircases, lifts and toilets. The height
of hand rails shall be normally 800 mm above the floor level. If the building is meant for the
predominant use of children, the height of hand rails may be suitably altered.
12. Guiding/Warning floor material: The floor material to guide or to warn the visually impaired
persons with a change of colour or material with conspicuously different texture and easily
distinguishable from the rest of the surrounding floor materials is called guiding or warning
floor material. The material with different texture shall give audiable signals with sensory
warning when person moves on this surface with walking stick. The guiding/warning floor
material is meant to give the directional effect or warn a person at critical places. This floor
material shall be provided in the following areas.
a) The access path to the building and to the parking area.
b) The landing lobby towards the information board, reception, lifts, staircases and toilets.
c) At the beginning /end of walkway where there is vehicular traffic.
d) At the location abruptly changing in level and at the beginning/end of a ramp.
e) At the entrance /exit of the building.
13. Proper signage: Appropriate identification of specific facilities within a building for the
handicapped persons should be done with proper signages. Visually impaired persons
make use of other senses such as hearing and touch to compensate for the lack of vision;
whereas visual signals shall benefit those with hearing disabilities.
Signs should be designed and located such that they are easily legible by using suitable
letter size (not less than 20mm size). For visually impaired persons, information board in Braille
should be installed on the wall at a suitable height and it should be possible to approach them
closely. To ensure safe walking there should not be any protruding sign, which creates
obstruction in walking.
The symbols/illustrations should be in contrasting colour and properly illuminated so that
with limited vision may be able to differentiate amongst primary colours.
79
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE XII
(Bye-law 32)
RAIN WATER HARVESTING
Rain water harvesting in a building site includes storage or recharging into ground of rain water
falling on the terrace or on any paved or unpaved surface within the building site.
1 The following systems may be adopted for harvesting the rain water drawn from terrace
and the paved surface.
i) Open well of a minimum of 1.00 metre dia and 6 metre in depth into which rain water
may be chanelled and allowed after filtration for removing silt and floating material.
The well shall be provided with ventilating covers. The water from the open well may
be used for non potable domestic purposes such as washing, flushing and for
watering the garden etc.
ii) Rain water harvesting for recharge of ground water may be done through a borewell
around which a pit of one metre width may be excavated upto a depth of at least
3.00 metres and refilled with stone aggregate and sand. The filtered rain water may
be channeled to the refilled pit for recharging the borewell.
iii) An impervious storage tank of required capacity may be constructed in the setback or
other than space and the rain water may be channelled to the storage tank. The
storage tank may be raised to a convenient height above the surface and shall
always be provided with ventilating the surface and shall always be provided with
ventilating covers and shall have draw-off taps suitably placed so that the rain water
may be drawn off for domestic, washing, gardening and such other purposes. The
storage tanks shall be provided with an overflow.
iv) The surplus rain water after storage may be recharged into ground through
percolation pits or trenches or combination of pits and trenches. Depending on the
geomorphological and topographical condition, the pits may be of the size of 1.20 m
width x 1.20 m length x 2.00 m to 2.50 metre depth. The trenches can be or 0.60 m.
width x 2.00 to 6.00 metre length x 1.50 to 2.00 mtr depth. Terrace water shall be
channelled to pits or trenches. Such pits or trenches shall be backfilled with filter
media comprising the following materials.
a) 40 mm stone aggregate as bottom layer upto 50% of the depth;
b) 20 mm stone aggregate as lower middle layer upto 20% of the depth;
c) Coarse sand as upper middle layer upto 20% of the depth;
d) A thin layer of fine sand as top layer;
e) Top 10% of the pits/trenches will be empty and a splash is to be provided in
this portion in such a way that roof top water falls on the splash pad.
f) Brick masonry wall is to be constructed on the exposed surface of
pits/trenches and the cement mortar plastered.
The depth of wall below ground shall be such that the wall prevents lose soil
entering into pits/trenches. The projection of the wall above ground shall
atleast be 15 cms;
80
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
g) Perforated concrete slabs shall be provided on the pits/trenches.
v) If the open space surrounding the building is not paved, the top layer upto a sufficient
depth shall be removed and refilled with course sand to allow percolation of rain
water into ground.
2 The terrace shall be connected to the open well/borewell/storage tank/recharge pit/trench
by means of H.D.P.E./P.V.C. pipes through filter media. A valve system shall be provided
to enable the first washings from roof or terrace catchment, as they would contain
undesirable dirt. The mouths of all pipes and opening shall be covered with mosquito
(insect) proof wire net. For the efficient discharge of rain water, there shall be at least two
rain water pipes of 100 mm dia mtr for a roof area of 100 sq mtrs.
3 Rain water harvesting structures shall be sited as not to endanger the stability of building or
earthwork. The structures shall be designed such that no dampness is caused in any part
of the walls or foundation of the building or those of an adjacent building.
81
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
SCHEDULE XIII
SCHEDULE II OF THE NATIONAL BUILDING ORGANISATION
(BYE LAW 3.2.8)
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF WORKS AND HOUSING
NATIONAL BUILDING ORGANISATION
Housing and Building Construction activity in Private Sector (Karnataka State)
Name of Corporation: BANGALORE MAHANAGARA PALIKE
District: Bangalore Taluk Bangalore for the Quarter Ending…………..
Note: For items 1 and 2, please fill in the appropriate
Code Number in:
1. Nature of Construction: Code No :
a) New Construction 1.
b) Additions to existing buildings. 2.
2. Type of Construction : Total Plinth area Total Floor area
(Sqm) (Sqm)
a) Residential Buildings Code No.
i) Dwellings 1
ii) Other residential places
(such as Hostels, Dormitories/
Lodging Hotels and Clubs) 2
b) Industrial buildings(Factories/
Plants, Workshops etc.,) 3
c) Commercial buildings(Shops,
Ware-house, Offices, Public-
Garden etc.,) 4
d) Institutional buildings(Schools,
Hospitals and dispensaries,
Religious buildings, etc.,) 5
e) Other buildings( Public buildings
Public Libraries, amusement
Buildings etc.,) 6
3. Number of Stories in the building………….
82
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
4. Number and Type of dwelling in the constructions:
Type of Dwelling Number of Dwellings
New Additions to Total Plinth area
Construction existing buildings (Sqm)
One Room Unit
Two Room Unit
Three Room Unit
Four or more Room Unit
Particulars for the following items should be given while
applying for ‘ Occupancy Certificate’ only
5. Estimated Construction Cost (if available) …………………Rs……………….
6. Number and date of issue of authorization Certificate …………………….
7. Date of Commencement of Construction ……………………………………… .
8. Date of completion of Construction …………………………………………….
Date:
(Signature of applicant)
Name and Address of applicant ………………….
(In Block Letters)
……………………
(For use in Office only)
Reference Number of application: ………………………….
Number and date of issue of authorization/
Occupation Certificate.
……………………………
83
Building Bye-Laws – 2003
MAP
84
